---
id: 6evss0t4I0IC2cQasg0K2O
title: Understanding HIPAA compliance
slug: hipaa
discovery_topic: topics/hipaa-compliance
summary: >-
  This guide will walk you through important definitions and concepts, building
  on previous learnings. You will emerge armed with a basic understanding to
  HIPAA's purpose and rules, your obligations, and ways to address compliance.
subhead: A guide written by the authoritative voices on HIPAA compliance
tags:
  - hipaa
authors:
  - 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
  - 3VJKuWDfPak8w26k0g0Kw0
  - 5dsPZqJr4Qu2uww6KgYO0G
related_form: 1ITZgYKnMoaSQSacM0cQ4m
bg_image: /assets/general/guides/clouds_-_victor-garcia-329401_edit.jpg
image_thumb: /assets/general/guides/guide-hipaa-thumb.png
share_image: /assets/general/guides/guide-hipaa-share.jpg
---
This guide will walk you through important definitions and concepts, building on previous learnings. You will emerge armed with a basic understanding to HIPAA's purpose and rules, your obligations, and ways to address compliance.

Over the many years Datica has been providing HIPAA compliant cloud solutions
to healthcare companies large and small, we have amassed a comprehensive
understanding around what makes HIPAA confusing.


We have empathy for the anxieties you encounter and the confusion even veteran
healthcare leadership confide within us. We understand the questions we are
asked and the curiosities newcomers have. It is because of this unique
position as HIPAA experts in the healthcare community that we decided to
aggregate the most important topics into a condensed, easily digestible guide
for those looking to quickly gain literacy around HIPAA.


The Datica guide to HIPAA compliance will answer all your nagging questions.
Included in the guide:


- HIPAA Overview: The origins and intent of HIPAA

- Protected Health Information and why it is central to HIPAA

- Definitions of a Covered Entity, Business Associate, Subcontractor, and
which apply to you

- The importance of Business Associate Agreements

- How to prove compliance

- Why HITRUST is critical

- Administrative vs. Technical safeguards and obligations

- How audits are done, including estimated costs

- Finally, a simple explanation to whether you need to be compliant and how
you achieve compliance
