---
title: 'What Health Systems Can Gain From FHIR Adoption'
summary: 'A guide to open data models—the fuel for transformation.'
subhead: 'A guide to open data models—the fuel for transformation.'
related_form: 66LPjqRIZymM2e2WoquiAW
image_thumb: /assets/general/guides/guide-fhir-thumb.png
bg_image: /assets/articles/blog/embers_over_dark_waters__FHIR_guide_cover_.jpg
pub_date: '2020-01-08'
discovery_topic: topics/ehr-integrations
author:
  - 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
use_meta_keywords: false
page_no_index: false
no_follow_links: false
sitemap_priority: '0.5'
sitemap_changefreq: daily
twitter_share_setting: inherit
authors:
  - 7aMAu7W6K4M8S0eCuIyCCM
  - 5dsPZqJr4Qu2uww6KgYO0G
icon: what-health-systems-can-gain-from-fhir-adoption
id: QKaSmqZ3OuUG628eeqKOa
topics:
  - ehr-integrations
tags:
  - fhir
---
In this guide, we’ll review what FHIR enables in health systems, not from a technology perspective, but from an operational improvement perspective.

In a recent blog post on the [Rise and the Fall of the
EHR](/blog/2017-healthcare-trends-part-three-the-rise-and-fall-of-the-ehr/),
Datica co-founder Travis Good, MD mentioned how EHR vendors are promoting FHIR
as a way to allow open access to EHR data. In this guide, we’ll review what
FHIR enables in health systems, not from a technology perspective, but from an
operational improvement perspective.


At Datica, we often focus on the problem that we solve to stay true to our
focus and identity when making strategic decisions. Many of our employees have
decades of experience in enterprise EHR implementations and they often say
that in their EHR implementation days no one asked them, “What problem do you
solve?” If you were to ask an EHR vendor this question a number of years ago,
they might say they digitize paper health records to improve accessibility of
information. EHRs have met their goal and the patients’ healthcare data is
centrally stored and can be viewed across disciplines in an organization.


Today, we realize that those EHR implementations were laying the information
technology groundwork that would become the fabric of a healthcare
transformation movement. As Good wrote in his post, the EHR and data
consolidation are just the first steps in organizational

transformation. 


The Datica guide to __FHIR for Health Systems__ will help explain the best way
to adopt open data models to fuel transformation. Included in the guide:


- Healthcare’s Focus is on Transformation

- Open Data Models – A Path Forward for Modern Integration

- Respond with Agility

- Be Flexible in Vendor Choice

- Foster a Culture of Innovation

- Give up Some of Your Legos