---
id: 4QDw13xznycmAwm26KSgGU
title: 'The AWS re:Invent Ultimate Guide for Makers of Digital Health Products'
slug: aws-reinvent-ultimate-guide-for-makers-of-digital-health-products
pub_date: '2017-11-21'
tags:
  - aws
  - events
categories_blog: healthcare
author: 5kC0Y798vm6ag8sCq0O2CQ
summary: >-
  With 1,000 sessions to choose from, we offer a bit of help to our friends out
  there in the healthcare industry who might be attending AWS re:Invent next
  week.
lead: >-
  With more than a thousand possible sessions to choose from and so many parties
  to attend, we thought we’d offer a bit of help to our friends out there in the
  healthcare industry who might be attending *AWS re:Invent* next week. In
  addition to presenting and exhibiting, many of our own people will be at the
  following sessions, chalk talks, panel discussions, and, of course, at the
  healthcare happy hour. Don’t forget to stop by the Datica booth #519 while
  you’re there. See you next week!


  See the entire session list
  [here](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/search.ww).
featured_image: /assets/general/blog/aws_yellow_waterfall_texture_16x9.jpg
share_image: /assets/general/blog/blog-aws-reinvent-guide-share.jpg
cta_ref: 4OCkYKXr2EEQSIcse0GQOq
related_entries:
  - 4ItmAo1t5SIG8MsiEa2K2K
  - 5xoRY6Vp1C222IgKW4Emo8
  - 4AznnGBn9SEs6kAyyuCmIW
  - 3VMljZKhTquyQC46sao4mA
discovery_topic: aws-hipaa
---
#### [HLC304 - Architecting for HIPAA on AWS](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=15750)

This Chalk Talk discusses the latest in HIPAA–eligible AWS services that you can use for healthcare applications and private health information. Learn from AWS healthcare solution architects about some general strategies and common architectures to decouple protected data from processing and orchestration, track where data flows using automation, and have logical boundaries between protected and general workflows.

_**Why Attend:** HIPAA Compliance is what makes developing digital health application so much more difficult than developing applications in almost every other industry. Find out what AWS services matter for healthcare compliance._

#### [HLC307 - Building a Secure and Healthcare-Compliant Platform for Adopting a Cloud-First Strategy Using AWS](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=15749)

This session provides an overview of how Change Healthcare invested in people, process, and an automation platform to adopt a cloud-first strategy. Starting from building a Cloud Center of Excellence team, they identified the compliance, security, and cost optimization requirements and process required to build a framework. They also embedded healthcare compliance, security, architecture best practices, and customer-specific rules and standards for a managed adoption of the cloud. Change Healthcare is leveraging their Cloud 2.0 framework to rapidly deploy their mission applications into AWS. Come learn how Change Healthcare built a serverless architecture using Amazon ECS, AWS Lambda, AWS CodeDeploy, AWS CodeCommit, AWS CloudFormation, AWS Service Catalog, AWS OpsWorks, AWS Elastic Beanstalk, and other managed services.

_**Why Attend:** Change Healthcare is an innovator on the revenue cycle management side of healthcare. If you’re developing an application that has anything to do with claims processing, this session might be interesting to attend._

#### [HLC308 - Healthcare Payers and Serverless Batch Processing Engines](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=16683)

In this session, hear how Cambia Health Solutions, a not-for-profit total health solutions company, created a self-service data model to convert a large-scale, on-premises batch processing model to a cloud-based, real-time pub-sub and RESTful API model.  Learn how Cambia leveraged AWS services like Amazon Aurora, AWS Database Migration Service (AWS DMS), AWS Lambda, and AWS messaging services to create an architecture that provides a reasonable runway for legacy customers to convert from old mode to new mode and, at the same time, offer a fast track for onboarding new customers.

_**Why Attend:** Cambia Health is at the heart of innovation in healthcare and it will be interesting to hear how their self-service data model works._

#### [HLC309 - The American Heart Association and How to Build a Secure and Collaborative Precision Medicine Platform on AWS](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=15747)

The American Heart Association (AHA) Precision Medicine Platform was built on AWS to enable the research community to accelerate the development of solutions for cardiovascular diseases and stroke. In this session, AWS Partner Network, REAN Cloud, and the AHA discuss how they architected the AHA Precision Medicine Platform to facilitate healthcare research collaboration and data discovery for hundreds of users around the world. They discuss how to catalog, discover, and analyze precision medicine cohorts at scale using Amazon S3, Amazon EMR, Amazon Elasticsearch Service, and Amazon AppStream 2.0. Additionally, they explain how the platform adheres to the strict security and logging requirements necessary for compliance with HIPAA and FedRAMP by using AWS Identity and Access Management, AWS CloudTrail, AWS Config, and Amazon Kinesis.

_**Why Attend:** Find out how the AHA is building a Precision Medicine platform to analyze data at scale to help improve patient outcomes._

#### [HLC310 - How Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare's Focus on Standardizing Compliant Ops Led to Breakthrough Apps](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=16998)

The innovation team at Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare (MLH), an integrated health care delivery system, saw AWS as an enabler to faster ideation on breakthrough patient care products over their existing internal private cloud options. In this session, you learn how they eliminated HIPAA compliance as a barrier to their speed-to-market goals by standardizing internal DevOps and DevSecOps duties across applications, as well as taking advantage of the containerization of enterprise technology. MLH partnered with Datica, an APN Healthcare Competency Partner, to address vulnerability scanning, intrusion detection, disaster recovery, backups, encryption, audit logging, and deployment orchestration. You hear how, with this partnership, they ensure that the configuration and orchestration of all AWS HIPAA Eligible Services meet the controls set by healthcare's most stringent accreditation body, HITRUST, with every workload deployment. You also learn how MLH's adoption of a standard compliance layer led to quickly achieving stronger data integration with electronic health records.

_**Why Attend:** Because, Datica! But seriously, we’re excited to share how our customer MLH is finding great success on the Datica Platform._

#### [LFS302 - Real World Evidence Platforms to Enable Therapeutic Innovation](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=14474)

Historically, there has been an information asymmetry in pharmaceutical R&D where the biopharmaceutical companies had the deepest understanding and knowledge about their products and how they helped and interacted with patients. Now, there's new, real-world data that exists from regulators, health plans, government authorities, and patients, which is helping pharma companies to understand how their therapies and their innovations drive value and impact in patient populations. There are imperatives to leverage that data, create new partnerships in their ecosystem, and get access to that data in an ethical way to derive insights to both fuel innovation and drive discovery. In this session, you learn best practices from Deloitte and Celgene about strategy, operating models, and execution frameworks when implementing a real-world, evidence data platform.

_**Why Attend:** [The evidence stage of your digital health journey](https://datica.com/dhsf/#evidence-validating-the-idea) is one of the most difficult, yet crucial, stages to get through. Validating that your application is actually doing what you say it will or improving patient outcomes is what will help you grow and scale your business. Attend this session to learn about evidence in pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical organizations._

#### [LFS304 - Born in the AWS Cloud: How Eagle Genomics Uses AWS to Process Billions of DNA Sequence Reads](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=14507)

With the increasing use of genomic sequencing for scientific discovery, the rate-limiting step for researchers is not in obtaining genetic code, but in having the capacity for storage and computing power to analyze it. In this session, you learn how Eagle Genomics built a cloud platform that uses an open-source workflow engine (eHive), Docker containers to process jobs, and a REST service to manage pipeline runs, all to help customers process genetic sequences up to 20 times faster without additional costs. You also learn how Eagle used Amazon EC2 Spot instances to provide low-cost compute power, and services such as Amazon S3 to power their cost-effective and scalable genetic processing platform.

_**Why Attend:** One of the biggest impediments we hear about when large organizations are considering migrating to the cloud is the issue of how to handle those massive amounts of data. Find out how Eagle Genomics is scaling._

#### [LFS305 - Automated Policy Enforcement for Real-time Operations, Security, and Compliance for Life Sciences](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=14542)

Implementing stringent security and compliance controls, like GxP, across your enterprise cloud ecosystem, while ensuring the agility of the DevSecOps process requires significant expertise and a lot of time to design, build, and maintain custom operations tooling. In this session, you learn how Turbot used AWS services to simplify IT operations to provide continuous compliance to major life sciences customers. You also hear how life sciences companies like Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research (NIBR) have become agile, ensured control, and automated best practices using automated policy controls to configure, monitor, and maintain their cloud resources. By doing this, they became more supportive of their researchers' application stack. You also learn how data scientists and core researchers can take advantage of the power of DevOps and cloud computing without compromising enterprise security or data protection requirements.

_**Why Attend:** If you’re at the enterprise level, or maybe just curious about how large cloud ecosystems in Life Sciences maintain security and compliance, attend this session._

#### [LFS306 - How Eli Lilly Leverages AWS as a Clinical Innovation Platform to Change the Patient Experience in Healthcare](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=15680)

The Clinical Innovation Labs team at Eli Lilly and Company is leveraging AWS services, design thinking methodology, and co-creation to transform ideas for translating clinical research into real-world solutions. The Eli Lilly “Innovators’ Platform” is a rapid prototyping environment that combines patient behavior discovery analysis, art-of-the-possible storyboarding, health device mockup creation, and simulated patient walkthrough analysis. This platform is used to demonstrate the capabilities of emerging technologies and enables participants to contribute ideas to extend the platform. This presentation describes how the team and its processes work together, what components make up the platform, and why it’s making an impact on patient health. We discuss the team’s use of various AWS services, including AWS Lambda, Amazon API Gateway, AWS IoT, Amazon Cognito, Amazon S3, and AWS Elastic Beanstalk. We also provide demos of what has been built using this platform methodology.

_**Why Attend:** Eli Lilly is one of the top innovators in the biopharmaceutical segment of the healthcare industry. You might want to learn about how their innovation labs do things._

#### [ABD316 - American Heart Association: Finding Cures to Heart Disease Through the Power of Technology](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=15839)

Combining disparate datasets and making them accessible to data scientists and researchers is a prevalent challenge for many organizations, not just in healthcare research. American Heart Association (AHA) has built a data science platform using Amazon EMR, Amazon Elasticsearch Service, and other AWS services, that corrals multiple datasets and enables advanced research on phenotype and genotype datasets, aimed at curing heart diseases. In this session, we present how AHA built this platform and the key challenges they addressed with the solution. We also provide a demo of the platform, and leave you with suggestions and next steps so you can build similar solutions for your use cases.

_**Why Attend:** Population health management is an area many digital health technologies are focused on today. Attend this one to hear how the AHA is wrangling all that data using AWS._

#### [ARC205 - Born in the Cloud, Built like a Startup](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=14439)

This presentation compares three modern architecture patterns that startups are building their businesses around. It includes a realistic analysis of cost, team management, and security implications of each approach. It covers AWS Elastic Beanstalk, Amazon ECS, Amazon API Gateway, AWS Lambda, Amazon DynamoDB, and Amazon CloudFront. Attendees will also hear from venture capital investor Third Rock Ventures (TRV) who has launched 40+ biotech startups over the last 10 years. TRV will outline how it launches cloud native startups that turn bleeding edge science into new treatments across the spectrum of disease, with highlights drawn Relay Therapeutics and Tango Therapeutics.

_**Why Attend:** We all want to do everything we can to make sure our digital health startup succeeds in this competitive, highly regulated environment. It will be interesting to hear how Third Rock Ventures sees a startup’s viability._

#### [ARC407 - Deconstructing SaaS: A Deep Dive into Building Multi-tenant Solutions on AWS](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=16050)

SaaS presents developers with a unique blend of architectural challenges. While the concepts of multi-tenancy are straightforward, the reality of making all the moving parts work together can be daunting. In this session, we move beyond the conceptual bits of SaaS and look under the hood of an SaaS application. Our goal is to examine the fundamentals of identity, data partitioning, and tenant isolation through the lens of a working solution and to highlight the challenges and strategies associated with building a next generation SaaS application on AWS. We look at the full lifecycle of registering new tenants, applying security policies to prevent cross-tenant access, and leveraging tenant profiles to effectively distribute and partition tenant data. We intend to connect many of the conceptual dots of an SaaS implementation, highlighting the tradeoffs and considerations that can shape your approach to SaaS architecture.

_**Why Attend:** The [build vs. buy decision](https://datica.com/blog/do-you-have-360k-to-build-compliance-into-your-digital-health-product/) is one many makers of digital health products go through when deciding how to deploy their application into the cloud in a compliant fashion. Of course, we recommend buying Datica, a multi-tenant cloud platform ready-made for healthcare, but you might learn about what’s involved if you are considering setting up your own compliant infrastructure._

#### [CON205 - Birds of a Feather: Containers and Open Source at AWS](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=17800)

Cloud native architectures take advantage of on-demand delivery, global deployment, elasticity, and higher-level services to enable developer productivity and business agility. Open source is a core part of making cloud native possible for everyone. In this session, we welcome thought leaders from the CNCF, Docker, and AWS to discuss the cloud's direction for growth and enablement of the open source community. We also discuss how AWS is integrating open source code into its container services and its contributions to open source projects.

_**Why Attend:** At Datica, we believe that the future of healthcare is open and, in fact, just announced a move toward [open sourcing our code](https://datica.com/blog/announcing-one-click-installations-of-mirth-connect-and-open-source/) for healthcare integrations. Since [the Datica Platform](https://datica.com/platform/) is multi-tenant and container-based this session might help you understand how Datica enables fast, compliant deployment to the cloud for makers of digital health products._

#### [DEV320 - A Primer on Developing Software in the Cloud](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=14987)

Developers are always looking for new ways to make it faster and easier to develop and release software. However, their development tools haven't evolved to support the highly distributed, dynamic, fast-paced development processes made possible by the cloud. In this session, we take a closer look at the tools that developers can use to improve their productivity. Through demonstrations, we showcase how developers can quickly edit, debug, and deploy applications to the cloud while collaborating with their team.

_**Why Attend:** If you’re still at the [napkin scribble stage of your digital health journey](https://datica.com/dhsf/), you might want to attend this session to find out what it will take to develop your software in the cloud._

#### [ENT320 - How a Global Healthcare Company Built a Migration Factory to Quickly Move Thousands of Applications to AWS](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=14485)

Setting a goal for your teams to move a large number of workloads to AWS in a short period of time can be a great way to motivate teams to migrate quickly. Cardinal Health created a migration factory composed of teams, tools, and processes that streamlined the movement of workloads from on-premises to AWS. In this session, hear from Cardinal Health about how they used a migration factory to successfully move thousands of applications to the AWS Cloud.  In addition, learn best practices for creating an effective migration platform and process in your organization.

_**Why Attend:** The thought of [migrating to the cloud](https://datica.com/innovation/public-vs-private-cloud-computing-within-healthcare-summer-2017/) is one of the things that keeps healthcare CIOs up at night. This session will give you some insights from another brave healthcare team who has made the move._

#### [MSC301 - Cloud Security for Regulated Industries](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=14522)

In this session, we discuss the challenges that regulated industries (e.g., government, financial, and healthcare) face in demonstrating compliance with security requirements. Learn which AWS Marketplace services enable appropriate threat mitigations in cloud computing through customer use cases, and understand how to minimize your burden. We also demonstrate methods to reduce business impact while increasing security effectiveness and reducing risk in your environment.

_**Why Attend:** Compliance is healthcare’s middle name so if you’re a maker of digital health products, you’ll want to attend this session to find out how AWS is for regulated industries._

#### [GPSTEC303 - GPS: Blockchain and the Road to Innovation](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=15126)

For many, Blockchain has been a black box with little standardization on how to use the technology. The need to understand a multitude of protocols, consortiums, and services, along with their strengths and weaknesses, makes it difficult to select the best option for individual use cases. The lack of technical maturity leads to an uneasiness within the community that can negatively affect adoption. With our new partnerships, along with Intel, this panel discusses technology drivers that are pushing standards forward and accelerating the adoption of Blockchain in the AWS enterprise space. Come join us for a closer look at what Blockchain is doing for several industries and their use cases.

_**Why Attend:** It wouldn’t be a technology conference if someone wasn’t talking about Blockchain! We’re hearing lots of buzz about Blockchain in healthcare as some predict it may be the key to the future of secure data interoperability. Attend this session to find out what all the buzz is about._

#### [HLC01 - AWS Healthcare Happy Hour – Sponsored by Cloudticity](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=17776)

Come enjoy a drink and light snacks with your peers from the Healthcare Industry at Buddy V at The Venetian. You’ll have the opportunity to network with other industry professionals, as well as meet some of the AWS presenters from Monday’s Healthcare track. 

_**Why Attend:** The Datica crew will be there!_
  