---
id: 4uXJulf9dKA2IK62CSWw0M
title: Catalyze Selects Casey Bryson as Chief Strategy Officer
slug: catalyze-selects-casey-bryson-as-chief-strategy-officer
pub_date: '2016-01-14'
tags:
  - tags/company
  - tags/leadership
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: Catalyze Selects Casey Bryson as Chief Strategy Officer
---
### Healthcare IT firm strengthens resources with latest hire.

Madison, WI - (January 14, 2015)  Catalyze, Inc., today announced its newest executive team member. Casey Bryson steps into the Chief Strategy Officer position and will drive customer success. In his new role, Bryson will be reporting to CEO/Co-founder Travis Good, MD and President/Co-founder Mohan Balachandran.

Bryson will have oversight of Catalyze business relationships that are rooted in solving complex problems through collaboration and integration. “In efforts to align the wants and needs of hospital/provider systems with the core capabilities and competencies of Catalyze, my role will require relationship building with payers and other large and niche healthcare IT vendors in the community,” said Bryson. “Likewise, I’ll also work closely with the company’s sales, marketing and engineering to ensure alignment across all internal teams.”

Due to the company’s compliant hosting and integration solutions, Catalyze is in a unique position within the industry. “We have the ability to speak to different sectors of the healthcare industry,” said Catalyze President and Co-founder Mohan Balachandran. “With such deep domain experience in working with EHR customers, Casey brings a high level of industry knowledge, and also shares a vision of expanding the company through strategic business relationships.”  

Bryson joined Catalyze earlier this month from Epic Hosting where he coordinated customer network and Epic environment deployments, internal technical projects, legal agreements and vendor relationships. Prior to his work with Epic Hosting, Bryson spent more than 10 years with Epic leading the charge to drive overall and long-term customer success. In that role he scoped projects for Meaningful Use, ICD-10, population health and patient engagement and patient confidentiality.

Catalyze VP of Sales, Kevin Lindbergh, said, “Such experience helps Bryson understand how to help customers make their business models function; that’s how Catalyze succeeds, because we sell the ability for our customers to get things done and go-to-market quickly.”

  