---
id: 3kPO3MbAPuAg8wQgckkIQu
title: Catalyze HL7 Integration helps HealthLoop Enhance Customer Trust
slug: catalyze-hl7-integration-helps-healthloop-enhance-customer-trust
pub_date: '2015-05-20'
tags:
  - tags/customers
  - tags/hl7
  - tags/integration
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: >-
  Mountain View-based healthcare technology company scales up on Catalyze
  HIPAA-compliant platform and builds upon established trust and security.
---
Mountain View-based healthcare technology company scales up on Catalyze HIPAA-compliant platform and builds upon established trust and security.

Madison, WI (PRWEB) May 20, 2015

[Catalyze™, Inc.](https://catalyze.io), a leading HIPAA compliant platform provider for healthcare enterprises, today announced that [HealthLoop®](http://healthloop.com/) recently implemented its HL7 integration, to more securely and effectively combine its communication technology with a large provider.

HealthLoop has built a technology to automate follow-up care between patients, physicians and caregivers and had previously chosen Catalyze for its hosting company. Approximately two months ago, the company had to scale up for an important [HL7 integration](https://catalyze.io/hl7) push with a client. “We’ve done some basic integrations, but needed to setup a TCP/VPN connection for this provider,” explained Mayank Thanawala, HealthLoop’s vice-president of research and development. “If we had done that ourselves, it would have been very basic, taken our team several weeks, and not been nearly as well thought out.”

Already relying upon Catalyze’s compliant platform, Thanawala said that from a risk management perspective, the decision to go with Catalyze on the HL7 integration made sense. “It’s all about instilling a greater level of confidence with the customer and consolidating risk.”

Mohan Balachandran, president and co-founder of Catalyze said that when a health technology uses additional vendors to complete an HL7 integration, the risks increase both internally and externally. “That’s a concern for all tech teams and something that will keep them up at night. Catalyze builds a platform that allows companies like HealthLoop to get the basic compliant infrastructure and then scale-up as needed,” he explained.

That business approach worked well for Thanawala who said, “With Catalyze, we had the ability to scale out our bandwidth when we needed it.” Right now, HealthLoop’s integration is focused mostly on Epic, because that’s the electronic health record company they encounter most often. “It’s also one of the more complex EHR systems to interface with, so that’s the biggest win. But, the HL7 integration with Catalyze is useful for other systems, too.”

### About HealthLoop

HealthLoop keeps doctors and patients connected between visits with clinical information that is insightful, actionable, and engaging. HealthLoop automates the routine aspects of care while tracking patient progress and monitoring clinical areas of concern, boosting efficiency, and improving outcomes through patient engagement. For more information on HealthLoop, visit [http://www.healthloop.com](http://www.healthloop.com).

### About Catalyze, Inc.

Catalyze provides an innovative HIPAA-compliant platform with a complete set of modules to handle, store and transmit PHI in the cloud. Scalable, HIPAA-compliant and interoperable infrastructure is powering the future of healthcare, so Catalyze has built the platform upon which an enterprise can hasten healthcare innovation without becoming an overnight expert in compliance. For more information, please visit [https://catalyze.io](https://catalyze.io).

  