---
id: 1ukyjAsx8QiUqyeGiO6uUm
title: Catalyze Extends Domain Expertise with Chief Operating Officer Appointment
slug: catalyze-extends-domain-expertise-with-chief-operating-officer-appointment
pub_date: '2016-12-14'
tags:
  - tags/company
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
summary: >-
  Brian Lindstrom boosts Catalyze’s growing roster of employees with deep Epic
  experience.
---
MADISON, WIS. (PRWEB) DECEMBER 14, 2016

Catalyze, healthcare’s go-to source for HIPAA compliant HITRUST CSF Certified hosting and integration services, today announced the appointment of Brian Lindstrom to the role of Chief Operating Officer. In this newly created role, Lindstrom will report to Catalyze CEO Travis Good, MD and help operationalize the vision and strategy for the company’s two main product lines as it expands within the marketplace.
Before joining Catalyze, Lindstrom previously held the role of Chief Financial Officer for Influence Health of Birmingham, Alabama. Considering his Wisconsin roots, he welcomed a return to “the exciting health ecosystem of Madison.” Before Influence Health, Lindstrom spent six years as Controller for Epic, playing a key execution role in Epic’s rapid growth story. He also helped scale the financial group, as well as operationalized Epic’s international business and structured customer contracts during the company’s enormous growth phase. At Catalyze, he will martial this experience to help the company navigate its own growth trajectory.

“Catalyze has some interesting flagship customers right now and what the company is doing with integrations for those customers is quite unique,” said Lindstrom, Catalyze COO, who expressed excitement about the company’s market-leading cloud platform that offers turnkey, HIPAA compliant hosting and data integration for digital health applications. Compliant cloud hosting enables Catalyze to extend its reach into new markets, such as pharma and payers, which both offer new growth potential for the business. “Catalyze uses managed hosting and integrations to solve interoperability problems that others have yet to solve,” stated Lindstrom.

From the other six former Epic employees who now work for Catalyze, the sentiment runs parallel to Lindstrom’s. All have an entrepreneurial spirit that flourishes at Catalyze, where the opportunity to build something from the ground up, know how it works and then support it, presents itself daily. These employees also say that they have taken the underlying Epic culture to always do good, while always keeping promises, and have extended that sense of personal honor to how Catalyze treats its own customers.

“The industry insight that emanates from this group of former Epic employees engenders the type of trusted expertise our customers value,” said Catalyze CEO and Chief Privacy Officer Travis Good, MD. “Today, we feel fortunate to add Brian Lindstrom’s financial and operational leadership expertise into the mix.”

About Catalyze, Inc. 

Catalyze provides an innovative HIPAA compliant, HITRUST CSF Certified platform with a complete set of modules to handle, store and transmit PHI securely in the cloud. Scalable, HIPAA compliant and interoperable infrastructure is powering the future of healthcare, so Catalyze has built the platform upon which an enterprise can hasten healthcare innovation without the need to become an overnight expert in compliance. For more information, please visit http://www.catalyze.io.
  