---
id: 5doaftQGrmMe6CckMMamA2
title: >-
  Catalyze Extends Salesforce Health Cloud Data Capabilities as Trusted
  Integration Partner with EHRs
slug: >-
  catalyze-extends-salesforce-health-cloud-data-capabilities-as-trusted-integration-partner-with-ehrs
pub_date: '2016-02-29'
tags:
  - customers
  - company
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: >-
  Catalyze Extends Salesforce Health Cloud Data Capabilities as Trusted
  Integration Partner with EHRs
---
### Catalyze participates as Salesforce Health Cloud launch partner, empowering healthcare organizations to build stronger patient relationships while providing secure and trusted integrations

LAS VEGAS, NV (PRWEB) FEBRUARY 29, 2016

Catalyze, Inc., an innovative healthcare IT firm that offers a HIPAA compliant HITRUST CSF Certified platform today announced it will be providing live use case demonstrations of the capabilities of Salesforce Health Cloud at the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS16) Conference taking place Feb. 29 to March 4, 2016, in Las Vegas.

Catalyze provides a unique and trusted approach to data integration with Salesforce Health Cloud by providing functionality which manages the entire process of an integration. Catalyze's lauded commitment to the entire process of an integration—from start to finish—means Health Cloud customers can more quickly complete integration projects, all the while receiving Catalyze's HITRUST CSF Certified approach to data security and integrity.

HIMSS attendees will receive an intimate and tangible view of Salesforce Health Cloud and the way it can be utilized to improve patient and healthcare organization connectivity. Catalyze will demo a use case from client Propeller Health, the leading digital health platform in respiratory medicine. The use case illustrates how Catalyze used Health Cloud for integration of Propeller’s digital platform at a West Coast children’s hospital. Salesforce Health Cloud is available for purchase today, giving healthcare providers new ways to make smarter care decisions, engage with patients across their caregiver networks and manage patient data. Salesforce announced Catalyze as one of its launch partners for Health Cloud at HIMSS16.

As a mature consultative integration partner for healthcare vendors, Catalyze recently put its stake in the ground by releasing Redpoint, which offers an all-encompassing approach to [healthcare integrations](https://catalyze.io/redpoint). This approach will also be used as a Health Cloud partner.

Catalyze Integration Solution Key Features:

* HIPAA Compliant, HITRUST CSF Certified -- Catalyze is a secure and reliable platform partner, processing more than a million messages a day.
* Healthcare experienced, healthcare-only integrations -- Catalyze can quickly connect a vendor’s solution to a hospital’s EMR.
* Live working use-case demo for immediate viewing

Live use case demos will be held at the HIMSS16 Salesforce Lounge at the Clyde Ballroom, SLS Hotel during the Catalyze presentation on Thursday, March 3 at 1:00pm and after.

#### Comments on the News

“The Propeller client demo is exciting because many pediatric hospitals in the country use Epic,” explained Catalyze Chief Data Officer Mark Olschesky. “We helped Propeller and its client understand how to make the workflows work so the hospital could use the information flowing in and identify which patients to enroll in Propeller’s asthma and COPD studies, as well as ensuring that individuals are indeed enrolled.”

“We live in the age of the customer, and patients now expect personalized and engaging experiences with their healthcare providers,” said Joshua Newman, MD, Chief Medical Officer, GM, Salesforce Healthcare and Life Sciences. “Health Cloud is all about building stronger patient relationships, and Catalyze is a valuable part of our journey towards creating a modern healthcare platform for patients, doctors, and everyone else involved in care.”

Catalyze President and Co-founder Mohan Balachandran agrees. “This announcement is exciting, and with Propeller, offers new opportunities around prescribing behavioral change for patients. It’s great to see a company like Salesforce that has impacted so many other verticals now step into the healthcare market with the launch of Health Cloud.”

#### About Catalyze, Inc.

Catalyze provides an innovative HIPAA compliant HITRUST Certified platform with a complete set of modules to handle, store and transmit PHI in the cloud. Scalable, HIPAA compliant and interoperable infrastructure is powering the future of healthcare, so Catalyze has built the platform upon which development teams can hasten healthcare innovation without becoming an overnight expert in compliance. For more information, please visit http://www.catalyze.io.

#### About Salesforce Health Cloud

Salesforce Health Cloud is a cloud-based patient relationship management solution that enables providers to gain a complete view of the patient with integrated data from electronic medical records (EMRs), wearables and more; make smarter care decisions; engage with patients across their caregiver networks; and safely and securely manage patient data.

#### About Propeller Health

Founded in 2010, Propeller is the leading provider of an FDA-cleared digital health platform that helps reduce the cost of care while delivering better quality of life for individuals with chronic respiratory disease. Propeller provides better engagement, communication, and more insightful and personalized care. Backed by Safeguard Scientifics, Social Capital, California HealthCare Foundation, Kapor Capital and other investors, Propeller has been used by patients with asthma or COPD in over 35 commercial programs across the US at major healthcare systems, payers, employers and other commercial partners. Company recognition includes TEDMED Innovation Showcase, White House Champion of Change, and Bluetooth Breakthrough Product awards. Visit [http://propellerhealth.com/contact/](http://propellerhealth.com/contact/) to request more information.

  