---
id: 4A8k09xSHYcckuiieE0oE
title: Datica to Host Panel Discussing Digital Health Success at Health 2.0
slug: datica-to-host-panel-discussing-digital-health-success-at-health-2-0
pub_date: '2017-09-28'
tags:
  - tags/dhsf
  - tags/innovation
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
summary: >-
  Panel event to feature three prominent digital health leaders who share ideas
  on ways to increase chances of digital health product success.
---
MADISON, WISC. (PRWEB) SEPTEMBER 28, 2017

Datica, the leading cloud platform for digital health applications, today announced a panel event at the Health 2.0 Fall Conference in Santa Clara, Calif. The annual conference, which attracts 2,000 digital health decision makers, will be held October 1 - 4 at the Santa Clara Convention Center. Datica’s digital health panel titled “What does the success of digital health look like?” will be on Monday, Oct. 1 from 12:30-1:30 pm, in Grand Ballroom E.

Attendees to the panel session will hear deeply held thoughts on past success and failures in digital health from three distinguished panelists: 

* Christiana DelloRusso, Ph.D., Partner of Providence Ventures, the strategic venture capital arm of Providence St. Joseph Health.
* Kristi Ebong, Director Emerging Health Technology, Cedars-Sinai
* Carolyn Jasik, MD, Medical Director of Omada Health

Datica CEO Travis Good, MD, will moderate the informative session providing the most important observations from those who work in the digital health trenches. Attendees who want to increase chances of succeeding in the digital health space will walk away from the noonday session with solid answers to these questions and more.

* Does the business model of a digital health product factor as the biggest reason for later failure or success?
* How can health systems or payers help digital health succeed?
* How important are pilots to the success of a digital health product?

“We are excited to sponsor Health 2.0 and bring this dynamic session to the conference. Since the company’s founding four years ago, we’ve had thousands of conversations around industry frustrations, hopes, success and failures with digital health vendors and providers,” said Travis Good, MD, Datica CEO. “Those conversations have led to the development of Datica’s [Digital Health Success Framework (DHSF)](https://datica.com/dhsf), and this panel provides the opportunity to create one of the first open forum discussions that will help aid the progress of those developing digital health products today.”

During the conference, digital health self-assessments will be conducted in Datica’s booth #204 on the exhibit floor. Get more information on the Digital Health Success Framework at http://www.datica.com/dhsf.

## About Datica 

Datica is the platform for digital health success. We solve the problem of HIPAA compliance in the cloud, and enable secure data exchange between digital health and EHRs. Customers and partners across healthcare trust Datica to ensure the barriers for digital health are removed so innovation can happen faster. For more information please visit http://www.datica.com.
  