---
id: 6diKImcjoQA4wqwUoo6wcM
title: >-
  Catalyze Achieves HITRUST CSF Certification to Further Validate Its High
  Security Standards
slug: >-
  catalyze-achieves-hitrust-certification-to-further-validate-its-high-security-standards
pub_date: '2015-07-16'
tags:
  - hitrust
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: >-
  HITRUST CSF Certification allows healthcare technology company to expand
  client confidence around the rigorous security and privacy requirements of
  healthcare.
---
### HITRUST CSF Certification allows healthcare technology company to expand client confidence around the rigorous security and privacy requirements of healthcare.

Madison, Wisconsin (PRWEB) July 16, 2015

[Catalyze, Inc.](https://catalyze.io/), an innovative healthcare IT firm that provides a HIPAA-compliant platform for healthcare enterprise and developers, today announced its achievement of Certified status from the Health Information Trust (HITRUST) Alliance. With the HITRUST CSF Certified Status, Catalyze further proves its commitment to maintain the highest security standards for clients that create, store, access and maintain protected health information (PHI), and need [compliance with HIPAA](https://catalyze.io/hipaa-compliance) and HITECH requirements.

The HITRUST CSF, developed in concert with healthcare and information security experts, offers a single overarching security framework that rationalizes healthcare-relevant regulations and standards. As the most widely adopted security framework in the U.S. healthcare industry, the HITRUST CSF provides organizations with a comprehensive, flexible and efficient approach to regulatory compliance and risk management.

When the HITRUST CSF Certification of the platform had been finalized, Milwaukee-based healthcare company Mpirik shared what it would mean within its own organization. “The HITRUST CSF Certification gives us a sense of confidence that we can pass on to our customers,” explained Jake Bartnicki, head of business development at Mpirik. “It allows us focus on our core business, and selling our products in the marketplace.”

Helping companies more easily build and scale their own technologies in healthcare has remained the focus of Catalyze since its inception in 2013. Ensuring compliance for customers has been at the forefront of the Catalyze mission. “Since no true HIPAA certification exists, the compliance assurance for Catalyze customers can only be obtained and proven through third-party audits, like that of the HITRUST CSF Certification,” explained Catalyze CEO and Privacy Officer Travis Good, MD, in an [announcement](https://catalyze.io/blog/catalyze-is-hitrust-certified) earlier today. “This certification is crucial in demonstrating our commitment to upholding the highest data security standards to protect PHI.”

“HITRUST has been working with the industry to ensure the appropriate information protection requirements are met when sensitive health information is accessed or stored in a cloud environment. By taking the steps necessary to obtain HITRUST CSF Certified status, Catalyze is distinguished as a system that people can count on to keep their information safe,” said Ken Vander Wal, Chief Compliance Officer, HITRUST.

  