---
id: BDbisOss5q6Cm6IiqEgMK
title: Datica Names Kevin Lindbergh Chief Revenue Officer
slug: datica-names-kevin-lindbergh-chief-revenue-officer
pub_date: '2017-04-26'
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
summary: >-
  Internal hire will accelerate the industry-wide adoption of the company’s
  platform for digital health success and will supply additional strategic
  direction as the company grows.
---
MADISON, WISC. (PRWEB) APRIL 26, 2017

Datica, the industry platform for digital health success, today announced Kevin Lindbergh will lead the company’s revenue generating efforts and execute on an aggressive product development strategy begun in late 2016. As the Chief Revenue Officer (CRO), Kevin will provide strategic direction for the sales, marketing, and product teams that help drive the company’s revenue streams, as well as identify new opportunities for growth.

“As the board and I considered filling the newly created position of CRO, the wealth of talent from within our own team enabled us to tap a valuable internal source,” said Travis Good, MD, CEO, Datica. “Kevin will be accelerating our top-line revenue with hospital systems by drawing upon the expertise of Kris Gösser, vice president of marketing and Ryan Rich, Datica’s newly appointed vice president of product. Kevin will also provide oversight on the day-today sales efforts to digital health vendors.”

Kevin has a successful track record within Datica and was initially hired as the company’s Vice President of Sales in June 2015. With his deep expertise in healthcare, combined with a laser vision and strategy for company growth, he quickly recognized the significant potential Datica’s platform for digital health success could have on the market.

Digital healthcare is messy, but Datica’s mission to connect patients and providers with the tools and data they need to optimize care is one that won’t be solved by putting an API on top of an electronic health record. “We know that a customer who has an immediate need for compliant hosting or managed integration will eventually need other pieces like strategic services to achieve scalable success within digital health,” explained Lindbergh. “The industry has become leery of the piecemeal approach, so Datica’s full stack delivery layer empowers development teams with knowledge that their technology efforts are anchored on our unified platform; feature sets can simply be expanded as needed.”

Most recently, Kevin managed strategic relationships and did solution design at a startup focused on human capital management automation and enterprise collaboration. Prior to that, he held leadership positions in several healthcare organizations, including founding his own company focused on healthcare consumerism.

About Datica 

Datica is the platform for digital health success. We solve the problem of HIPAA compliance in the cloud, and enable secure data exchange between digital health and EHRs. Customers and partners across healthcare trust Datica to ensure the barriers for digital health are removed so innovation can happen faster. For more information please visit http://www.datica.com.
  