---
id: 365PN6AaAMCWckScEG2kGU
title: >-
  Datica’s HITRUST CSF Certified, GDPR and HIPAA Compliant Platform Featured at
  Microsoft Build 2018
slug: datica's-hitrust-csf-certified-gdpr-and-hipaa-compliant-platform-featured
pub_date: '2018-05-08'
tags:
  - tags/kubernetes
  - tags/cloud-computing
  - tags/gxp
  - tags/gdpr
summary: >-
  The platform, created by Datica and built for healthcare developers, had its
  cloud-based healthcare solution showcased, and general availability on
  Microsoft Azure was announced.
---
SEATTLE AND MADISON, WIS. (PRWEB) MAY 08, 2018

Datica, a Microsoft solution provider, was featured at this year’s [Microsoft Build 2018 Developer Conference](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/events/build/content "Microsoft Build 2018 Developer Conference"), May 7-9. Engineers and executives leading the way in the cloud heard how Datica’s platform, which is HIPAA, HITRUST, GDPR and GxP compliant, works in concert with Microsoft Azure to help break-through real-world workflows within clinical settings. During Build 2018, Datica’s compliant cloud technology was highlighted for its success in connecting Microsoft 365 Business tools with Electronic Health Records (EHRs). The new integration tooling that bridges Microsoft Teams with EHRs will work within the bot framework of Teams. An announcement of the tooling’s general availability in the Azure Marketplace was also made in Seattle during Microsoft Build 2018.

Travis Good, MD, CEO and chief privacy officer of Datica, said “Announcing this new tooling on top of our new Kubernetes-based platform as being generally available for enterprise customers in Microsoft’s ecosystem while simultaneously being featured at Microsoft Build 2018, is a huge honor.”

In the healthcare IT field, Datica’s technology is recognized for its compliance with HIPAA and HITRUST, as well as its security-focused approach. Datica engineers made [healthcare compliance](https://datica.com/platform/compliance/ "healthcare compliance") a non-issue for application developers when they built the HITRUST CSF Certified platform to assume all liabilities in the cloud associated with HIPAA, [GDPR](https://datica.com/discover/gdpr/ "GDPR"), and GxP. The new integration tooling that works to connect Microsoft further with healthcare and yet in a compliant way is good for the healthcare field.

“We are pleased to see Datica build technologies that help solve healthcare’s technology challenges,” said Kristina Behr, General Manager, Office for Healthcare, Microsoft Corp. “By bringing Electronic Health Record data into Microsoft Teams for secure collaboration, Datica is meeting the challenging workflow demands of the healthcare enterprise.”

Following Microsoft Build 2018, customers will also be able to license Datica’s platform, putting it on their own Azure account, or for additional security and compliance oversight, have it managed within Datica’s Cloud on Azure.

About Datica 
The Datica Platform manages all ongoing compliance and security burdens found within the exacting standards of HIPAA, HITRUST, GDPR, and GxP. Customers can license and deploy cloud-native healthcare applications on their own cloud account, or tap Datica’s compliance and security expertise to launch and manage applications on Datica’s cloud account, as well as receive integration guidance for connecting to electronic health records (EHRs). Datica built the HITRUST CSF Certified Platform for those who collect, store, manage and share protected health information (PHI) in the cloud. Datica’s customers range from mid-to-late stage startups to Fortune 100 companies across the healthcare spectrum: solution providers, hospital organizations, pharmaceutical giants and nationwide health insurance payers. For more information, go to Datica.com.
  