---
id: 392lJ9TcQgASIQ6IYUMQsu
title: >-
  Datica and Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare Co-present at AWS re:Invent 2017
  about Standardizing Compliance on the Cloud
slug: datica-methodist-lebonheur-healthcare-copresent-aws-re-invent-2017
pub_date: '2017-11-16'
tags:
  - aws
  - events
author: 5kC0Y798vm6ag8sCq0O2CQ
summary: >-
  Healthcare breakout session will provide insight into how hospital adoption of
  a standard compliance layer quickly led to innovative applications and
  stronger data integration with Electronic Health Records.
featured_person: 27xLQUYWzy6K62Y00woAky
---
Datica, the cloud platform for digital health applications, today announced the selection of Adam Leko, the company’s chief technology officer and David Deas, Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare’s (MLH) corporate director, innovation & knowledge analytics, for a joint healthcare presentation on how to eliminate [HIPAA compliance](https://datica.com/guide/application-hipaa-compliance/) as a barrier to speed-to-market hospital development goals at this year’s AWS re:Invent conference.

> In 2017, Datica has enabled several hospital systems to more effectively reduce capital and operational costs by safely and securely moving to the cloud in a compliant manner. This presentation will show how MLH uses the compliant Datica platform to ensure that the configuration and orchestration of Amazon Web Services (AWS) HIPAA-eligible services meet the controls set by the healthcare’s most stringent accreditation body, HITRUST, with every workload deployment. - Adam Leko, Datica

While demand for on-premises infrastructure has diminished in healthcare, the adoption of cloud-based solutions has grown exponentially. Cloud computing is proving that it expands accessibility to healthcare data and Datica’s platform is helping those health systems interested in deploying digital health applications in the cloud to meet the rigorous security and [regulatory compliance standards](https://datica.com/guide/total-cost-of-ownership-of-cloud-compliance/) of the industry.

> By removing security concerns as a barrier to using cloud-based systems, Datica has opened up a new world of possibilities that we would otherwise have been too cautious to undertake. Leveraging the ease and expandability of the compliant Datica platform running on AWS we have greatly accelerated our Innovation team’s capabilities, which allows us to play out ‘what if’ scenarios without large capital commitments or burdensome ROI proofs. All of this has expanded the number of projects we can tackle and lead to a remarkable transformation in how we approach healthcare innovation. - David Deas, MLH

The Datica/MLH 60-minute live presentation, How Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare’s Focus on Standardizing Compliant Ops Led to Breakthrough Apps will take place on Monday, November 27 at the Venetian, Level 2, Venetian F in Las Vegas at 12:15 Pacific Time.

For more information about Datica, visit booth #519 and get more details about AWS re:Invent 2017, at: [https://reinvent.awsevents.com](https://reinvent.awsevents.com).

## About Datica 

Datica is the platform for digital health success. We solve the problem of HIPAA compliance in the cloud, and enable secure data exchange between digital health and EHRs. Customers and partners across healthcare trust Datica to ensure the barriers for digital health are removed so innovation can happen faster. For more information please visit [https://datica.com](https://datica.com).

## About Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare 

Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare (MLH) is an integrated healthcare delivery system based in Memphis, Tenn. Founded in 1918 by The United Methodist Church to help meet the growing needs for quality health care in the Mid-South, Methodist has grown from one hospital into a six-hospital system that includes Le Bonheur Children’s Hospital, a national US News and World Report Best Children’s Hospital. MLH also offers a home health agency, ambulatory surgery centers, outpatient facilities, hospice residence and physician practices serving all corners of the Memphis and Mid-South community. Consistent with its innovative approach to leveraging technology to make it easier for patients and providers to interact, MLH was named to the 2017 Health Care’s Most Wired list. For seven consecutive years, Methodist has been named the best hospital in Memphis by U.S. News and World Report Great Place to Work® and Fortune ranked Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare on its 2017 100 Best Companies to Work For, #11 for 2017 Best Workplaces for Women, #21 for 2016 Best Workplaces for Diversity, and #1 on the 2016 list of Best Workplaces for African Americans. With more than 12,000 associates and 1,650 licensed beds, MLH provides care for over 400,000 Emergency Room visits and more than 60,000 inpatient admissions annually. For more information, [visit http://www.methodisthealth.org](http://www.methodisthealth.org).
  