---
id: 1mAfNcZCBawsGuOM4W6Quy
title: >-
  Datica Launches Kubernetes-enabled Platform to Extend AWS and Cloud Accounts
  for Customers
slug: datica-launches-kubernetes-enabled-platform
pub_date: '2018-03-05'
tags:
  - tags/gxp
  - tags/gdpr
  - tags/aws
  - tags/pricing
  - tags/open-source
  - tags/company
  - tags/security
  - tags/compliance
summary: >-
  The next evolution of the company's licensed Platform grants compliance
  coverage for HITRUST, GxP, GDPR, SOC 2 and HIPAA.
---
[Datica](https://datica.com "Datica"), the leading cloud platform for digital health since 2013, today announced its next-generation platform to manage HIPAA compliance on top of AWS and Microsoft Azure. The evolved version of the Datica Platform extends security and compliance expertise in three critical ways to better serve healthcare organizations:

1. The [Platform](https://datica.com/platform "Platform") now uses Kubernetes as its underlying container orchestration, granting customers greater technical flexibility. 
2. The move will also allow customers to install the Platform on their own AWS or Azure cloud accounts. 
3. Compliance coverage is extended to include GxP, GDPR, and SOC 2.

Kubernetes is now the fundamental technical management layer for the platform. Since 2015, Kubernetes has become the industry standard for container management, lending the best tools for workload deployment on public clouds.

"Making Kubernetes the central workhorse for the next version of the Datica Platform left no debate," said Travis Good, MD, CEO. "Kubernetes helps healthcare teams adopt modern technology while bridging to existing architectures. Basing the new Datica Platform on Kubernetes will provide stronger support for Windows architectures, better service extensibility, and more self-serve tooling," Good said.

The move to Kubernetes opens up the ability for customers to deploy a licensed version of the Datica Platform on top of their own AWS or Azure cloud accounts. Previously customers deployed their workloads onto Datica's hosted cloud. Now, the new Kubernetes-enabled Platform allows customers to gain the same security and compliance assurances, but in their own cloud accounts. There, they can retain maximum flexibility and control.

[Compliance](https://datica.com/platform/compliance "Compliance") postures have also been strengthened. The new platform version extends support beyond HIPAA and HITRUST. To date, Datica has obtained three HITRUST CSF Certifications while its hosted customers have passed more than 1,000 audits and risk assessments while on the platform. The new platform will also be GxP and GDPR compliant, making it a strong option for Life Science technology teams, or healthcare teams who do business in Europe.

Available April 2018, the new Kubernetes-enabled platform offers a license starting at $40,000 per year. Contact Datica at datica.com or visit HIMSS18 booth #5077 to obtain more details for your organization.

#### About Datica
The Datica Platform manages all ongoing compliance and security burdens not covered by AWS and Microsoft Azure. Through the Platform, customers deploy cloud-native applications and integrate with EHRs. Datica is HITRUST CSF Certified, and services all who handle PHI in the cloud, from startups to the Fortune 100. For more information, go to Datica.com.
  