---
id: 5n21s6UH1mQ6kMC4YC6aKk
title: >-
  Access HealthNet Selects the Datica Platform to Accelerate Interoperability
  and Security for Medical Reimbursements
slug: access-healthnet-selects-the-datica-platform-to-accelerate-interoperability
pub_date: '2018-05-10'
tags:
  - tags/customers
summary: "Wisconsin-based companies form a working alliance to streamline healthcare data exchange for hospital and medical billing."
---
	
MILWAUKEE AND MADISON, WIS. (PRWEB) MAY 10, 2018

Madison-based [Datica™](https://datica.com "Datica") and Milwaukee tech startup [Access HealthNet](https://accesshealthnet.com/ "Access HealthNet") (AHN) today announced a strategic partnership to deliver EMR interoperability and security through AHN’s [healthcare bundling platform](https://accesshealthnet.com/the-super-option/ "healthcare bundling platform"). The companies will collaborate to ensure compliance requirements are met to the standards of HIPAA and HITRUST CSF Certification and streamline operations for AHN’s customers.

Together the two companies will greatly expand their ability to assist providers and employers in streamlining the medical reimbursement process that has plagued modern healthcare and fueled its skyrocketing costs.

Founded in 2014, AHN has become a leader in direct contracting with its cloud-based bundling platform, offering more than 350,000 episodes of care throughout the country at more than 5,000 facility locations to self-insured employers, unions, and Medi-Share programs.

"Partnering with Datica will propel our platform forward exponentially,” said AHN’s Chairman and CEO, Eric Haberichter. “Our vision of being fully interoperable with all major hospital and medical billing systems will become a reality much more rapidly with this partnership.”

Datica has been serving an array of high-profile medical facilities across the country and has become the Midwest’s premier HITRUST CSF Certified, [HIPAA compliant digital health platform](https://accesshealthnet.com/the-super-option/ "HIPAA compliant digital health platform"). Founded in 2013, Datica now powers the next era of healthcare technology with its interoperable Kubernetes-enabled cloud infrastructure.

"We recognize the health tech surge happening in both Madison and Milwaukee today. That’s only one reason why Datica is delighted to partner with Access HealthNet in providing the compliance and security layers that hospital and medical systems seek,” said Datica CEO and Chief Privacy Officer Travis Good, MD. “With its bundled payments solution, Access HealthNet is providing a much-needed cost transparency for healthcare; seeing these innovations arise from two Wisconsin cities is a boasting point for the state of Wisconsin.”

About Datica 
The Datica Platform is designed for those who store, manage and share protected health information (PHI) in the cloud and manages all ongoing compliance and security burdens found within the exacting standards of HIPAA, HITRUST, GDPR, and GxP. Customers can license and deploy cloud-native applications on their own cloud account, or tap Datica’s cloud account to receive compliance, security and electronic health record (EHR) integration expertise to launch and manage applications. Datica’s Kubernetes-enabled platform customers include mid-to-late stage startups to Fortune 100 companies across the healthcare spectrum: solution providers, hospital organizations, pharmaceutical giants and nationwide health insurance payers. For more information, go to Datica.com.

About Access HealthNet 
Access HealthNet (AHN) increases access and affordability in healthcare through an e-commerce healthcare marketplace called The Super Option that connects value-based providers offering flat-rates and bundles to self-funded employers. AHN’s proprietary platform has several iterations to serve healthcare’s vast stakeholders, including a direct-to-consumer offering called The Super Option Direct, and a workers’ compensation solution called WC Bundled Payments. To learn more, visit accesshealthnet.com.
  