---
id: 1LeRgIEH5dYmcebs4cdHIZ
title: Datica to Speak at HITRUST 2019 Annual Conference
slug: datica-speaks-at-hitrust-2019
pub_date: '2019-04-24'
tags:
  - events
author: 5kC0Y798vm6ag8sCq0O2CQ
summary: >+
  Travis Good MD to participate in panel discussion about HITRUST and NIST
  Assurance

featured_person: 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
---
Datica, the leading provider of cloud compliance tools for digital health applications, [today announced](https://www.prweb.com/releases/datica_to_speak_on_nist_panel_at_hitrust_2019_annual_conference/prweb16259942.htm ) participation in a panel discussion at the [HITRUST 2019 annual conference](https://web.cvent.com/event/02834e3f-f30c-4138-8726-f310ccef995f/summary), May 21-23 in Grapevine, TX. The annual conference, which attracts professionals in privacy, security, and compliance, is focused on information risk management in the healthcare industry. 

> We are excited to continue our active participation with the HITRUST Alliance by speaking at the 2019 conference. Datica has always taken a lead role in understanding not just compliance, but the value of HITRUST to assure information security and compliance, which is a crucial step for digital health businesses to achieve market value. - Travis Good, MD

Travis Good MD, Co-Founder, CEO, and chief privacy officer of Datica, will speak on Wednesday, May 22nd at 2:00 pm during a panel discussion titled, “Leveraging HITRUST Programs for NIST Assurance.” Joined by industry leaders from Mayo Clinic, Humana, and the U.S. Department of Treasury’s Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). Good will share how Datica has used third-party assessments and the HITRUST CSF to demonstrate compliance with NIST standards. 

This marks the eighth time Datica has participated as a distinguished presenter at an official HITRUST event since becoming one of the first cloud-based organizations to be HITRUST CSF Certified in 2015. During that time, Dr. Good was also [named to the HITRUST Business Associates Council in 2016](https://datica.com/press-release/travis-good-md-selected-to-the-hitrust-business-associate-council/), to which he and the Datica team advise on compliance topics related to the public cloud.

## About Datica

Datica de-risks the cloud for digital health with software that manages all ongoing compliance and security burdens not covered by cloud service providers. Through its suite of products, customers deploy cloud-native applications and integrate with EHRs. Datica is HITRUST CSF Certified, and services all who handle PHI in the cloud, from startups to the Fortune 100. For more information, go to [Datica.com](https://datica.com).


  