---
id: 2s5BVVuzecWmYs2SI24UEy
title: 'Travis Good, MD, Selected to the HITRUST Business Associate Council'
slug: travis-good-md-selected-to-the-hitrust-business-associate-council
pub_date: '2016-04-06'
no_index: true
tags:
  - tags/hitrust
  - tags/company
  - tags/leadership
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: 'Travis Good, MD, Selected to the HITRUST Business Associate Council'
---
### Catalyze’s extensive compliance and privacy expertise earns its CEO and Chief Privacy Officer Travis Good, MD a spot as a founding member of the HITRUST Business Associate Council

MADISON, WI (PRWEB) APRIL 06, 2016

Travis Good, MD, CEO and chief privacy officer of Catalyze, Inc., has been selected as a founding member to the Health Information Trust Alliance (HITRUST) Business Associate Council (BA Council). The BA Council is composed of members who will serve as an advocacy group for the healthcare industry’s business associates, specifically focused on the [value of HITRUST](https://catalyze.io/hitrust) in third-party information security assurance. The 17 members of the BA Council were selected from a pool of industry leaders and experts in technology, security, risk compliance and audits.

The HITRUST Alliance will lean on this council to help shape HITRUST’s approach for business associates at an important time in the industry. A growing number of HIPAA-covered entities, including health insurers Anthem, Inc., Health Care Services Corp., and Highmark, Inc. have recently announced a requirement that their business associates become certified as compliant with HITRUST’s Common Security Framework within 24 months.

Catalyze has taken a lead in understanding not just HITRUST, but the value of HITRUST for business associates in the marketplace. “This appointment validates our leadership and expertise in compliance, and particularly HITRUST, which is such a big trend in the industry,” said Dr. Good. “I think that experience and knowledge, as well as the things Catalyze has done in the industry can contribute significantly to translating the value of HITRUST and its rigorous approach to information security for business associates.”

The HITRUST BA Council will carry the value torch of certification to the industry through leaders like Dr. Good and the other council members. Healthcare organizations that create, access, store, manage, or exchange personal health information (PHI) will find HITRUST CSF to be a common risk and compliance management framework designed to ensure a solid security strategy.

“As providers and health plans continue to lean heavily on Business Associates to provide an increasingly wide range of services, it’s really important to hear the voices on the front lines, to understand the views of the BAs, to determine how best to engage BAs in activities that are equally important and relevant to both BAs and Covered Entities. Getting appropriate BA representation with the broadest view is important. HITRUST is thrilled to have Catalyze join the other thought leaders in these efforts,” said HITRUST Senior Advisor of Public Policy, David Muntz.

The first meeting of the HITRUST BA Council will occur at the HITRUST 2016 Annual Summit, April 25-28 in Dallas/Fort Worth at the Gaylord Texan Resort. At that summit, Dr. Good will share his company’s journey to HITRUST CSF Certification, on Thursday, April 27 in a panel that also includes Coalfire, a leading HITRUST CSF Assessor used by Catalyze.

For more information on the Catalyze journey to HITRUST CSF Certification, please download the Case Study: [https://catalyze.io/compliance/hitrust](https://catalyze.io/compliance/hitrust)

  