---
id: 7LpX3JdrYXbgG3wF7jlemd
title: >-
  Datica to Showcase Portfolio of Products to Manage PHI on Public Clouds at
  HIMSS 2019
slug: datica-products-manage-phi-on-public-clouds-at-HIMSS
pub_date: '2019-02-11'
tags:
  - tags/events
  - tags/aws
  - tags/microsoft
author: 5kC0Y798vm6ag8sCq0O2CQ
summary: 'Exhibits and presentations in the Datica, AWS, and Microsoft booths. '
---
Seattle, Wash.— Datica, the leading provider of cloud compliance tools for digital health applications, will be demonstrating its comprehensive portfolio of solutions at the upcoming HIMSS Global Conference & Exhibition held at the Orange County Convention and Exhibition Center in Orlando, FL from February 11-15. Datica is exhibiting in booth #621, presenting in the AWS booth #5058, and is a showcased partner in the Microsoft booth #2500. The HIMSS 2019 event brings together more than 45,000 health information and technology professionals, clinicians, executives and market suppliers from around the world.

## Datica Booth #621

Datica’s product family includes solutions to manage healthcare compliance on the cloud and EHR integrations. Powerful when used on their own but meant to work together, the entire product suite will be on display at HIMSS in the Datica booth, #621.
Compliant Platform as a Service (CPaaS) - A compliant, hosted platform to build and deploy digital health applications. Offers simplicity and speed to emerging digital health products that need to demonstrate credibility without taking on the burdens of security and compliance. For more information, visit [datica.com/cpaas](https://datica.com/cpaas/)

- **Compliant Kubernetes Service (CKS)** - A secure, compliant Kubernetes cluster for enterprise scalability of complex digital health applications.  As applications and services scale so does the need for orchestration and developer control along with the ability to take on more of the compliance responsibility. For more information, visit [datica.com/cks](https://datica.com/cks/)

- **Cloud Compliance Management System (CCMS)** - Datica’s newest SaaS product that manages and monitors the precise compliance state of cloud environments. The CCMS helps manage compliance within a customer’s AWS, Azure, or Google cloud account by reporting the exact configuration state of their respective cloud services, and then monitors it daily to ensure those services remain in the proper configuration state. For more information, visit [datica.com/ccms](https://datica.com/ccms/)

- **Compliant Management Integration (CMI)** - Scalable and secure data exchange with any EHR. Customers not only have to worry about PHI compliance on the cloud but also need a secure way to get PHI data in and out of EHRs. CMI has been used to complete 200+ live integrations with all major EHRs at hospitals and clinical facilities. For more information, visit [datica.com/cmi](https://datica.com/cmi/)

Visitors who complete a tour of Datica’s product family will be eligible to receive a MiiR insulated cup or a copy of Datica’s new book, Complete Cloud Compliance.

## AWS Booth #5058

On Thursday, February 14 at 9:30 am, Kris Gösser, Datica chief marketing officer, will present, “HITRUST Assessments on Amazon Web Services,” in the AWS booth, #5058. As AWS customers gear up for their next audit, this thirty-minute presentation will help prepare them for a HITRUST CSF assessment. Attendees will learn how the Datica Cloud Compliance Management System (CCMS) streamlines continuous compliance management and simplifies reporting of their complex AWS environment.  

## Microsoft Booth #2500

Datica is also a showcased partner in the Care Coordination section of the Microsoft booth #2500. Mark Olschesky, Datica chief data officer will demonstrate how Datica’s Compliant Managed Integration (CMI) product helps facilitate interoperability between Office 365 platforms and provider EHR systems. Attendees will also be able to inquire about how the Cloud Compliance Management System (CCMS) product helps prepare their Azure cloud environments for a HITRUST assessment.

## About Datica

Datica de-risks the cloud for digital health with software that manages all ongoing compliance and security burdens not covered by cloud service providers. Through its suite of products, customers deploy cloud-native applications and integrate with EHRs. Datica is HITRUST CSF Certified, and services all who handle PHI in the cloud, from startups to the Fortune 100. For more information, go to Datica.com.


  