---
id: 6iB9erlNNtAht8qtZ581aO
title: >-
  Datica CEO Jeremy Pierotti to Highlight the Complexity and Risk of Building
  Healthcare Applications in the Cloud at MedCity Invest Digital Health 
slug: >-
  ceo-jeremy-pierotti-highlight-complexity-risk-building-healthcare-applications-cloud
pub_date: '2019-08-31'
tags:
  - events
  - investing
author: 1A5IaGt8WEKs4Q3JkvqrTl
summary: >-
  Datica CEO, Jeremy Pierotti, will be speaking at MedCity Invest Digital Health
  about the most effective approaches of a cloud compliance management system
  and how it should be uniquely designed to fit the specific requirements of the
  healthcare industry.
related_entries:
  - 25IBVnU0snAsECq4fkDGf2
  - 3DM1eof2mnpx0tCjiIe5OS
---
## Who

[Datica](https://datica.com/) is the provider of a complete, cloud-based platform that mitigates the complexity and risk of integrating and using health data in the cloud. The company’s chief executive officer, Jeremy Pierotti, will [lead a feature session](https://events.medcitynews.com/invest-twincities/agenda/) at [MedCity Invest Digital Health](https://events.medcitynews.com/invest-twincities/agenda/) (formerly INVEST Twin Cities), an event for healthcare investors and startups in the digital health sector to network and connect. Attendees include innovative investors across the healthcare spectrum, prominent industry players and the most promising digital health startups offering innovative approaches will come together to try to solve some of healthcare’s greatest challenges. 

## What

Uniting to facilitate investment opportunities with the most innovative companies from the digital health sector, MedCity Invest Digital Health connects active investors with healthcare executives to transform health through technology. To support the innovators and developers working to enable data-driven healthcare in the cloud, Datica CEO Jeremy Pierotti will present the session, “The Complexity & Risk of Building Healthcare Applications in the Cloud.” He will speak to the most effective approaches of a cloud compliance management system and how it should be uniquely designed to fit the specific requirements of the healthcare industry. This includes built-in policies and procedures designed to meet the needs of HIPAA, HITRUST, GDPR, and GxP; a continuous monitoring tool to focus on checking specific compliance controls; and how developers can prove compliance.

*For a media briefing please contact Kay Kelly at [kay.kelly@svmpr.com](mailto:kay.kelly@svmpr.com). *

## Where

The Depot Renaissance Minneapolis Hotel, 225 3rd Avenue South Minneapolis, MN 55401

## When

Tuesday, September 17, 2019. Jeremy is speaking from 4:50 PM CT – 5:10 PM CT. For the full conference schedule, [please click here](https://events.medcitynews.com/invest-twincities/agenda/). 

### About MedCity Events

MedCityNews.com is one of the fastest growing sites focused on B2B healthcare innovation, and producer of MedCity Events, dynamic and unique innovation-focused events that gather industry experts and innovators to address the challenges facing all of healthcare.

MedCity events include MedCity INVEST, focused on healthcare investing; MedCity CONVERGE, focused on healthcare convergence innovation; and MedCity ENGAGE, focused on innovation in patient engagement.

## About Datica

[Datica](https://datica.com) evolved in 2019 when Datica Health, Inc. merged with [Sansoro Health, Inc.](https://datica.com/about) The company now provides the most complete, cloud-based platform available to accelerate healthcare’s transformation to a data-driven future. It achieves this by mitigating the complexity and risk of integrating and using health data in the cloud. 

Leveraging patient data is essential to deliver effective digital health solutions that improve outcomes and reduce costs. However, healthcare regulations create a number of integration and compliance issues. To solve these challenges, Datica simplifies and speeds the development process for those that need end-to-end security and scalability to integrate health data from any source into the cloud. For more information, visit [https://datica.com](https://datica.com).


---

__Media Contact: __


Kay Kelly
SVM Public Relations 
Kay.kelly@svmpr.com
401.490.9700

  