---
id: 6oGNrlVMVqgkGIem20yuu6
title: >-
  New Innovation Interview Series Provides Key Insights from Top Healthcare
  Innovation Experts
slug: >-
  new-innovation-interview-series-provides-key-insights-from-top-healthcare-innovation-experts
pub_date: '2015-04-08'
no_index: true
tags:
  - tags/innovation
  - tags/leadership
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: >-
  New Innovation Interview Series Provides Key Insights from Top Healthcare
  Innovation Experts
---
Madison, WI - April 08, 2015

Catalyze, Inc., an innovative healthcare IT firm that supplies HIPAA-compliant infrastructure services, announces a new Healthcare Innovation Interview Series. The series allows entrepreneurs, enterprises and healthcare administrators to hear directly from experts who have broken down the roadblocks and rolled out the red carpet for disruptive healthcare innovations.

The series begins with four well-known healthcare innovation leaders who offer insights on everything from the transition of healthcare data ownership and HL7 integrations to an inside look at success/failure rate of ideas. “For every 100 fantastic ideas, 99 don’t really scale and either don’t benefit the patient from an access perspective, or the clinician from an efficiency perspective,” stated Marc Chasin, MD, MMM, CPE, CHCIO, St. Luke’s Health System.

The first four interviews have been posted and are located here on the Catalyze Healthcare Innovation Interview page:

* Molly Coye, MD, MPH, chief innovation officer, UCLA Health System;
* Chris Belmont, VP & CIO, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center;
* Wayne Guerra, MD, MBA, University of Denver guest lecturer on innovation and co-founder iTriage;
* Marc Chasin, MD, MMM, CPE, CHCIO, vice-president and CIO, St. Luke’s Health System

Learning how to break through the organizational layers and present a potentially game-changing technology to payers and hospital systems can mean the difference between a start-up getting a pilot and potential reference customer or dying on the vine. This series offers this type of information for that start-up segment.

“We work with many healthcare start-ups in desperate need of information around the best practices for approaching large insurance companies and healthcare systems,” explained Travis Good, M.D., CEO and co-founder of Catalyze. “We believe this innovation interview series can not only help those entrepreneurs, but also the CIOs and hospital executives by offering the latest innovative ideas that are catalyzing change within healthcare systems, as they move from a volume to value-based healthcare delivery model.”
A new innovation interview will be posted once a month, along with the written transcript of the recorded segments at [http://www.catalyze.io/innovation](/innovation/).

To learn more about the Healthcare Innovation Interview insights, visit Booth #1699 South Hall at HIMSS15 and speak with Catalyze co-founders Travis Good, MD and Mohan Balachandran.

### About Catalyze

Catalyze provides HIPAA-compliant infrastructure services with a complete set of tools for handling, storing and transmitting PHI in the cloud. The future of healthcare will be powered by scalable, HIPAA-compliant, interoperable infrastructure. Catalyze is building the groundwork so healthcare innovation can move faster. For more information, please visit [https://catalyze.io](https://catalyze.io).

  