---
id: 4IatwB48QwkceQGoUQqEIa
title: 'Charles Jaffe, MD: Why Healthcare Should Expand its View of FHIR'
slug: charles-jaffe
pub_date: '2016-10-18'
tags:
  - tags/leadership
summary: >-
  Mohan Balachandran chats with HL7 CEO Charles Jaffe, MD in this podcast
  presentation. From this segment, listeners will discover more about FHIR and
  learn why developers and hospital systems shouldn’t wait for a fully baked
  data exchange standard. Healthcare leaders often raise many questions around
  FHIR and Dr. Jaffe provides clarity around those questions. With standards as
  a critical component of healthcare innovation, this FHIR-based podcast is a
  must for those who can’t get enough understanding of FHIR.
author: 3VJKuWDfPak8w26k0g0Kw0
guest: 3ZSIYmGpRCuWWq4asuEkiq
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no"
  src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/294158312&amp;color=1055ff&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false"></iframe>
key_takeaways: >-
  1. Learn about the three products of the FHIR Foundation

  2. Discover ways that FHIR can enable clinical decision support and
  personalized medicine

  3. Hear first hand when FHIR will become a normative standard

  4. Be directed to the face-to-face opportunities available with the HL7
  organization
---
**On the origination of FHIR:** "Five years ago, as part of the HL7 Fresh Look initiative, we developed the FHIR standard. And that standard has evolved so that we are about to emerge as a normative standard in the spring. By normative standard I mean one that has been validated and approved by the American National Standards Institute, or ANSI."

**On the future promise of FHIR:** "I think as we move forward, we'll see more and more applications suited to healthcare literacy, so patients aren't confronted with their lab results but have access to explanations of their procedures, lab tests, results, diagnosis and the medications they take, all on a convenient single interface."

**On leveraging data for precision medicine:** "No longer will we give the same starting dose of the same drug for every patient that has elevated blood pressure. But they will be able to adjust, not on the dose, but the type of medication specifically for the pathology inherent in the elevation of the blood pressure and the genetic characteristics of the patient that has to take it."

[FHIR has] reached a point of adoption where there is enough critical mass to ensure that these APIs that the stability of the standard and the usefulness of the platform can be assured."

**On FHIR’s direct impact:** "FHIR is very fast to develop so the ease with which application development and therefore the cost of application development has been brought down critically."

**On groups leveraging FHIR:** "One of these is the clinical research community. So not only the regulated research community -- bio, pharma and small bio-tech, but also the academic research community sees an opportunity to obtain data from multiple sources. But more importantly, bring data from other sources there."

**On clinical decision support:** "I think one of the critical areas that physicians often overlook that leverage the value of electronic health records is clinical decision support. So there is an initiative in support of FHIR called CDS Hooks, which use FHIR to access the many commercial and public databases for clinical decision support."

### More On FHIR: The Grahame Grieve Interviews

Dr. Jaffe mentioned Grahame Grieve, "The Father of FHIR", in this episode. Check out parts [one](https://catalyze.io/innovation/grahame-grieve-pt1), [two](https://catalyze.io/innovation/grahame-grieve-pt2), and [three](https://catalyze.io/innovation/grahame-grieve-pt3) of these interviews.
  