---
id: 6jA6tzvdG886cyim8eGISg
title: 'Micky Tripathi: a FHIR-side Chat'
slug: micky-tripathi
pub_date: '2016-07-22'
tags:
  - tags/interoperability
  - tags/fhir
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  In this episode, Travis Good, MD conducts a FHIR-side chat with Micky
  Tripathi, President and CEO of the Massachusetts eHealth Cooperative. The two
  discuss the upsides and down-sides of the new data standard and dig into the
  predictions around availability of use case applications and FHIR tools, as
  well as app portability enabled by FHIR. Despite what many feel about FHIR’s
  ability to solve all aspects of the interoperability puzzle, Tripathi uses his
  humor to illustrate how misplaced those sentiments might be. Listeners will
  also be treated to Tripathi’s thoughts of who the industry dark horse may be
  in solving the problem with patient-generated data. 
author: 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
guest: 1asL7Fj3xAcSUYGW6UEoUm
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no"
  src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/275676666&amp;color=1055ff&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false"></iframe>
key_takeaways: >-
  1. Discover why other vertical developers have avoided developing within
  healthcare and why FHIR changes that

  2. Get the inside scoop on timing of FHIR production use case estimates

  3. Become educated on what FHIR won’t help you solve

  4. Learn more about the Argonaut Project and the role it plays with the new
  standards development
---
**On why FHIR changes things for one developer outside of healthcare:** "THAT I can work with. I look at it and it’s a language I can read; it’s something that I’m happy to build to, because it makes complete sense with the way I’ve been doing internet technology in other sectors."

**On why those outside healthcare start with patient facing apps:** "They seem to approach it from the patient perspective, in part because they are not working from the inside out, so that’s their point of access in the healthcare system."

**On predictions around production timing:** "I think we’ll start to see that as people get certified to meet a particular use case related to a consumer-facing API, we’ll put more and more specific things into production, maybe later this year and certainly in 2017. There’s increasing demand that I’m always surprised by.

**On the Argonaut Project:** "We have a growing an implementation community, which is 90+ organization who have enrolled in the implementation community. I don’t want to pretend that we have 90 active participants every week. That’s the reality of these kinds of things — there’s a lot of interest and participation at different levels, according to what their needs are."

"The whole purpose of the Argonaut Project was to say let’s take the work that is being done at the standards level and see what we can do to accelerate a subset of the broader FHIR that’s being developed through the standards development organization HL7."

**On what FHIR won’t solve:** "The things that [FHIR] won’t solve is disincentives or lack of incentives that exist in the market for exchanging information in the first place. It doesn't solve any of those things."

**On whether FHIR will replace HL7 version 2:** "One thing I can say with confidence is even if it does, it's going to be a very long transition process. I think we'll have version 2 point-to-point interface transactions in place for a long time, in part because they are pretty rock solid and they work, and they are in place today. It's the classic "if it's not broken, don't fix it."

**On the key stakeholder who might put patient-generated data to use:  "**Everyone wants to upload their FitBit data somewhere and they are discovering that their doctors really don't want it. What if CVS said, ‘Send your FitBit stuff to me. I have a team of epidemiologist and others and fancy algorithms that will do a lot of the signal-to-noise analysis and you tell us who your PCP is and we will tell your PCP when we see something that they should be concerned about.’ And then patients trust CVS even more and they are tied in even more with CVS."

----

If this podcast leaves you wondering about this new data standard, [learn more about FHIR](https://catalyze.io/fhir) here in less time than a coffee break.
  