---
id: 1DferVUZYpoqYVgrCOZ9j5
title: 'How MSOs Let Doctors be Doctors '
slug: how-msos-let-doctors-be-doctors
pub_date: '2018-12-11'
tags:
  - tags/pricing
  - tags/leadership
  - tags/podcast
  - tags/interoperability
category_brand: true
share_image: /assets/general/podcasts/podcast-4x4-share-31-nayyar.jpg
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  In this podcast, we speak with Geeta Nayyar, M.D., M.B.A. about her
  experiences as the Chief Healthcare & Innovation Officer for Femwell Group
  Health, a management services organization (MSO).
author: 1iL3zeL6PWrbLRgZE9x5Mf
guest: 127x6w7kNBnZKCeLR2wjcR
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe title='How MSOs Let Doctors be Doctors'
  src='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/gupas-a12f29?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  data-link='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/gupas-a12f29?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  height='122' width='100%' style='border: none;' scrolling='no'
  data-name='pb-iframe-player' ></iframe>
transcript: >-
  **Dave:** Welcome to Four by Four health sponsored by Sansoro health. Sansoro
  health integration at the speed of innovation. Check them
  out@wwwdotsansorohealth.com I’m your host doctor Dave Levin. Today I’m talking
  with Geeta Nayyar, M.D, MBA chief healthcare and innovation officer for
  Femwell Group Health, one of the largest management services organizations in
  the state of Florida. Her previous roles have included CMIO for AT&T, and
  board member of HIMSS. He does a nationally recognized leader in healthcare
  information technology. She was named one of the “Top 26 smartest people in
  Health IT” by Becker’s report and Med city news recognized her as one of the
  top 12 powerful women voices in healthcare innovation and on twitter. She’s a
  noted social media expert and blogs for the Huffington Post. She also wrote
  the foreword for a book I coauthored, although I note she didn’t list that on
  her resume. Welcome to Four by Four Health, Geeta.


  **Geeta:** Thanks so much for having me on Dave. I really appreciate it, and I
  don’t know how I left the book out. I don’t know how that happened. We’ll have
  to fix that.


  **Dave:** God, oh, it might be too late for that, but I appreciate it. Geeta,
  I’m going to ask you a series of four questions today and give you about four
  minutes to answer each one. So if you’re ready, let’s jump right in. Well,
  let’s start by having you tell us about yourself and your organization.


  **Geeta:** Sure. Well, my background again is as a rheumatologist, then an
  internee maybe what we call it, primary care doctor in today’s world, but I
  really spent my career in health technology. Used to be the CMIO for AT & T.
  I’m currently the chief healthcare and innovation officer for Femwell group
  health. We are essentially an MSO, one of the large MSOs here in the state of
  Florida, about 500 physicians that we serve, and we provide products and
  services, too, and it’s been a really amazing blend of health technology,
  typical MSO services but continues to be my sweet spot of giving a physician
  view to both business, technology and the clinical world. It’s been a
  fantastic journey.


  **Dave:** Yeah, that term MSO, I’m of course with it but take a minute and
  elaborate more on exactly what that is. Some of our listeners may not be
  familiar.


  **Geeta:** Sure. So, for Management Services Organization, and if you think of
  a physician’s office is having a front end, which is where the patients are
  seeing, which is where the waiting room is, where doctors doing the doctoring,
  the MSO side would be behind that. So, if you think of the backend of the
  physician’s office where you have to do the billing, the collections, the
  marketing, the EMR, all of this stuff that we as doctors hate to do, that is
  not the clinical stuff, that’s what an MSO to this it provides and very
  similar to ours. That’s what we do.


  **Dave:** That’s really interesting. How did you decide to get involved in
  this kind of work?


  **Geeta:** Sure. Well, what other things that really drew me to Femwell, is
  that it’s a physician owned company, so, I love the idea of working for a
  physician owned company that represented about 500 physicians in the state of
  Florida and it just felt so good to be able to help physicians do what they
  want to do and actually be able to talk to other physician executives and not
  just business people, or attorneys, or compliance folks. So, it feels really
  nice worker at physician organization as a physician myself.


  **Dave:** Well, this is a topic that interests me too. I remember for my early
  days in training, going to Dr. Power’s office. She was the family doctor, let
  my interest in family medicine and primary care, and she was a solo
  practitioner and the small business woman. It was very obvious to me from the
  beginning that she was both caring for her patients and caring for this
  business, and it took an enormous amount of time and dedication. The promise
  of MSOs, I think is intriguing, as you said letting docs who want to focus on
  clinical care and allowing others to handle the business operations. Of
  course, in practice it often turns out to be more challenging than it looks on
  paper.


  **Geeta:** Absolutely. You hear that, that’s right. We’re basically in health
  and power 500 small businesses and you and I both know, right? That the hard
  part isn’t diagnosing part. It takes us less than a minute to come up with a
  diagnosis. lupus, diabetes, hypertension. The hard part is all that other jazz
  that it’s only with out there and it’s the best way, and it’s really fit.


  **Dave:** Tell us what’s the most important or interesting thing that you’re
  working on right now?


  **Geeta:** Sure. So, many things. Right, but I would have to say that, us,
  like so many organizations are trying to figure out how you go from pay for
  service to fee for value and we really think our patient engagement strategy
  is going to help us lead that drumbeat in both models. So, the patient
  engagement work that we’re doing is phenomenal and I think it really touches
  all the different areas of population health management, telemedicine to just
  basic access for patients and all of the consumer centric struggles that so
  many offices face threats.


  **Dave:** How’s that going so far?


  **Geeta:** It’s going pretty amazing. It’s a really simplistic concept but
  essentially, we went through a vendor selection process, a pretty rigorous
  one. We went to class, looked over class reports. It’s one of the leaders in
  the space and essentially, we are really just texting our patients. We text
  our patients, “Hey, you’re about to turn 40, here’s some information on
  mammograms. We really think you ought to come in to see the Doctor Nayyar and
  have a discussion to things like, Hey, we just noticed you missed your
  appointment,” and annual wellness visits are a big part of how we prevent the
  flu, how we prevent diabetes. These are really simple concept, but we are
  getting so much out of just creating this tether between the patient and the
  physician, and it’s not to via portal, it’s actually not via portal, it via
  simple text but it’s a very smart rules engine and it’s being delivered in a
  way that is visible to the physicians so they don’t have to do anything, and
  to the patient, like all of us were very used to getting a text from our
  friends and family, our veterinarian, our dentists salon, but we’ve never
  really gotten a text from our doctor. So, it’s like, “Huh, that is so cool.”


  **Dave:** You had just picked one of my questions which was provider
  acceptance of this, and of course it’s, I think it’s well recognized. Our
  clinicians are already overburdened and super busy and folks like me
  implemented EMR is that made their lives even more miserable, and so when we
  start to talk to them about, “Hey, you can text your patients,” or “How bout
  some email.” Their initial reaction is often, I can’t even handle what’s
  coming at, we might now. How does this work? It sounds like you guys have
  designed a system that, and it shields them from that except when they really
  need to be involved.


  **Geeta:** Exactly. I always say that the best health technology is the one
  that are invisible, right. I love the word invisible, because we don’t want to
  mess with the work-flow. We don’t want anyone, least of all the doctors and
  the MAs and the staff to have just think too much and that’s really the beauty
  of this, is that the thinking is done by the technology and there is no work
  flow interruption. It is really a customer facing solutions that outreaches to
  the patient. This is a product by health grade is our partner and they were
  bought by all scripts, but essentially it will text one of our patients that,
  let’s say they have, what we call a gap in care, but they haven’t come in for
  their physical exam. They only come in for their flu shot. They’ll get a text,
  “Hey, this is Dr. Nayyar, just reminding you that we missed you at your annual
  wellness visit. Click here to make an appointment.” Really simple things like
  this, and it’s going a long way because they’re not used to that, right? So,
  first of all, they’re going to answer it because it’s from their doc, and
  secondly, it’s easy. They’re not getting a voicemail, they’re not having to
  call during office hours, and for our physicians, it’s no different than any
  other appointments, that just happens to be on their schedule. The schedule is
  well, and you’ve got three bonuses today. That’s fantastic from an ROI
  standpoint, right? How that appointment with me, what the outreach was, it’s
  really not important to the physician. So, when I say it’s invisible, that’s
  what really is sold us on this technology and we really went about this, like
  everyone else. We went out into the market thing, we need to pop health
  vendor. We need a pop health management solution, and what we realize is all
  the pop health management vendors out there were going to give us a report,
  and we were like, “Okay, what are we going to do with this report? We’re going
  to turn around and give it to the office managers that you got to call, 300
  diabetics that miss their A1C or that are way out of range, that is a workflow
  challenge, and so what we liked about this solution is it took it a step
  further to say if they were going to do the pop-health stratification, but
  then we’re going to take care of the gap. We’re going to actually outreach to
  the patient, text them, call them and look, you have outliers that don’t
  respond but those are the ones that are in the office and their staff can
  focus on from a high touch perspective, but we’ve been able to find a solution
  for the majority of the patients pretty well.


  **Dave:** Let me ask you two questions about it specifically. I presume,
  knowing you, that you’re also looking at those outcomes, and so what you’ve
  created as a system of actionable information as you say. I got this list but
  what the heck do I do with it? I presume that you’re also looking at, well did
  it actually change things in the world real world. Are patients happier? Do
  they come in more those indicators or mixed or positive in this case?


  **Geeta:** Absolutely no. All of this is data driven. Data is the name of the
  game for sure. We even have some offices that told us we have a full proof
  system in our office, our staff calls until we do the chart reviews and then
  we call– We don’t want this technology. We know you’re a tech nerd, we don’t
  need it. First thing we did was pull their data. I said, “Do you know that you
  have 500 gaps in care just over the next six months. So whatever system you’re
  using., it has some flaws.” Or it’s about with number one or even leading the
  conversation with my docs to say, “Did you know that of your patient
  population, most of them, come back every two years for a visit, not every
  year?” Or that, “You’re way off when it comes to your mammograms or you’re way
  off when it comes to clue shots.” So, it’s a data driven conversation and
  definitely we’re absolutely looking at the delta. We’re really pleased at the
  results and we feel really good about it cause it’s again something so simple
  that I think a lot of folks are missing to train on frankly,


  **Dave:** Right. I would just add, that system might have been working well
  for that office, but it wasn’t consulting. It was very patient centric. You
  mentioned earlier that you are dealing with that ongoing transition from the
  old world fifa service model, pay me to do stuff, to the value-based model
  which is far more related to outcome and not just activity. The last time I
  looked at any given market, somewhere between 10 and 20% of reimbursement
  coming from value-based care, the lion’s share is still coming from
  traditional fee for service. I don’t know if those numbers are up to date, but
  I’m sure it’s at least somewhere in that neighborhood. What has always
  fascinated me about this question is I’ve always felt like a lot of these
  activities can work in either model, and I love the way you’ve referred to
  this as looking for gaps in care and closing them. This is not making work,
  this is not creating stuff. Finding care that patients really should have and
  then rendering it and my Dave’s theory and please call BS on it if you
  disagree is, well that actually works fine under fee for service and it works
  fine under value-based care. You just have to be thoughtful about which
  problems you’re going to attack and how. Does that make any sense to you or am
  I drinking my own cool aid here?


  **Geeta:** No, completely and a big part of why we went about this way is well
  is because it’s good medicine, whether we call it pay for value, pay for
  service, it’s good medicine, right? I’m always looking for solutions that are
  just good medicine help my physicians to be able to improve the quality of
  care and I want all my patients to make sure that they come in for their
  mammogram, their pap smear, their annual wellness visit, no matter which model
  I’m being reimbursed in, right. It’s just about, I think when you do the right
  thing by the patient, everything else falls into place. That’s always the
  guide that I use. Whatever the metric might be, whatever the reimbursement
  model might be, the standard of care and the practice of medicine should
  always be under that guise and I think that the problem we all have as docs,
  is that there’s just not a lot of tools that help us do that. That’s really
  the future of medicine. That’s really the future of modern medicine is going.
  All of these incentives are meant to just make sure we stay focused on an eye
  towards what is the right thing to do for our patients.


  **Dave:** I think that’s right and then finding more efficient ways do things
  than we did in the past and again I’m just huge fan of this idea of actionable
  information. It does me no good to have information if I can’t actually do
  something with it to make the world a better place. I love this very practical
  approach that you’re taking. I want to ask you the next question and at this
  point I off usually remind my guest, that this is a family show so please keep
  it PG 13, but we want to hear your current favorite rants or pet peeve.


  **Greeta:** I want to ask you save it. Probably my biggest pet peeve is just
  doing with social and data basis in the industry that always lead with this is
  what we’ve always done. This is what we did five years ago, this is what we
  did 10 years ago. This is what we do with the last organization I was in when
  we were faced with this problem. I agree with looking to historical data and
  survey data and things that have guided us in the past. Well, where we are in
  medicine today is very different. It’s very different, and I think to really
  make an impact on the industry today or even just from an innovation
  standpoint, I know I want to work with people who can think outside of the box
  that will keep in mind, what history is, but are also looking to the future
  for new solutions and new ways to do things. I think that’s the only way to be
  successful healthcare and really make an impact, and so that is my biggest pet
  peeves is. Whenever anyone leaves with, “This is how we’ve done it,” or “This
  is how we did,” it just makes me cringe a little because I already know that
  whatever they’re going to say after that is not going to be the solution.


  **Dave:** After you count to 10 internally, what do you say or do in those
  situations that you found to be constructive?


  **Greeta:** Well, I always say that’s not where we are today. I totally
  recognize, validate where we’ve been and where you come from, but where we are
  today is X or where we need to be tomorrow with Y, and the truth is we don’t
  know, and I never pretend to have the answers, I just know that theis
  environment is different and the goal is different. Clearly the solution has
  to be done.


  **Dave:** Yeah, this has been a theme for through this early podcast series.
  This issue of we need to innovate and there are great ideas from many other
  fields outside of health care. We want those ideas to come in. At the same
  time, there’s reasons why we do some things we do in healthcare the way that
  we do that there’s useful history there too, and so there’s this mashup that’s
  going to need to occur where new ideas come in, they’re informed by history
  and experience, but they don’t drown in that, and it’s just, the reason I
  bring this up is most everybody I’ve talked to in this podcast series, this
  question has raised its head in one form or another.


  **Greeta:** Good. I’m not alone.


  **Dave:** No, no you’re not. No, you’re not. I think it requires all of us to
  come at it with an open mind and patients. All of us. Then folks come in and
  new as well, because it doesn’t really help if they come in and their attitude
  is what you people have been in health care, you all must be stupid or lazy.
  You can’t figure this out. It’s not that hard


  **Greeta:** For sure.


  **Dave:** At the same time, when we stand up and go, well, you don’t
  understand healthcare is different. Well, that kind tends to shut things down
  as well.


  **Greeta:** Totally I agree. Totally I agree.


  **Dave:** That’s a pretty good pet peeve. For our last question today, what
  I’d like you to do is share with us your most sage advice.


  **Greeta:** I would say, and I say this a little bit as a mom as a doctor.
  There’s this is one quote that I love, and I actually don’t even know who is
  the person that came up with it, but the quote that always come to mind for me
  is, “A good man or woman who does nothing is evil enough.” Right, it’s not
  enough to just be a good person and some of us just be a good doctor. I truly
  feel that it’s important to push yourself beyond yourself, push yourself
  beyond your individual profession, and really contribute. Contribute outside
  of yourself to your community, to your society, to your world, because just
  being a good person, it’s fantastic, but if you’re not aware of what’s going
  on around you, and the fact that you might be able to impact it, I think
  that’s a sad thing and I think that’s a missed opportunity, and I feel like I
  see it every day, either personally or professionally, and I think it’s just
  folks got a get up and participate. Get up and participate, whatever that
  might be. Then again, when it comes to my daughter, don’t just be the
  observer. Get out there and do something. Even if you can’t do it perfect,
  you’ll learn and you’ll contribute and you’ll do your best. You’ll do your
  best.


  **Dave:** I certainly share that belief and I’m always frustrated when people
  want to just basically sit on the sidelines and complain about things or be
  helpless, it’s far more empowering beginning the game and absolutely you’re
  going to make mistakes and you’d probably make a few things worse rather than
  better. That’s part of the process as well. I think the other thing that I
  find consistently is people that I meet that are the most interesting, the
  most affective and who seem happy have a balance in their life as well. Yeah,
  there’s meaning in their work, but they’re not all about their profession, and
  so I loved reading about your other activities and your involvement with your
  daughter. I think we all have something could contribute in that way. It makes
  us a better person too.


  **Greeta:** Absolutely. That’s why we pick health care, right, before we pick
  medicine.


  **Dave:** Well, I think that’s right, and I think part of fixing health care
  is creating better balance in the lives of our clinicians and others that work
  in health care. You didn’t reference this, but it’s pretty clear burnout as a
  serious issue getting worse, and I think part of this is, clearly internal,
  the mechanics of health care and where we are right now, but I also think some
  of it is cultural and historically we’ve not been good about balance in our
  lives, and setting that example for young clinicians, doctors, nurses or or
  what have you. Forgive me. I feel like I’m giving a lecture.


  \[laughter\].


  **Greeta:** Not at all.


  **Dave:** I’ve been so fortunate in my life to have good mentors and role
  models around. I see others that I think suffer because they haven’t had that.
  Again, I would ask you to either validate that or correct me.


  **Greeta:** Completely. Completely listen. One of the things that every year,
  at the beginning of my daughter’s school year, they ask all the parents what
  they want to volunteer for, and they have Halloween trade, and they’ve got the
  bake sales, and they’ve got just any number of awesome activities for folks to
  participate in. I just go to the teachers every year and I said, “Can I teach
  the class \[Diane\]?” I do a great job of teaching the kids, heart, lung
  sounds, how to take their pulse, and again, also just so the girls in the
  class can also see a female physicians teaching them a mama up there, doing
  something a little bit outside of the box, and it’s really simple, and to be
  honest with you, it’s so easy, and Fun for me. I much rather volunteer in
  activity that I’m really good at, and I do every day than try to carve a
  pumpkin, I’m not very good at that Dave.


  \[laughter\]. Let’s say for me to be doing this. I don’t think you have to go
  so far outside of yourself is what I need to say, but I think being thoughtful
  about what would be the most impactful way to spend your time and most
  impactful thing to do, especially for our kids. Just something we should all
  think about, and I think time is precious. We live in a world where everything
  is instant, everything is quick. My time is very precious. Your time is very
  precious. So, I’d like to make the most out of my time and I think that taking
  a minute to stop and think about what that is, is just as important as
  actually doing it.


  **Dave:** I think that’s so true. In my case, it’s attempting to play video
  games with my two boys. I’m horrible, but they don’t care. They just want to
  be doing something together, and that’s what they care about. I could not
  agree more. Well, this has been really terrific Geeta. I appreciate your time
  today, and your observations, and your sage advice. Let me give you the last
  word before we wrap up today.


  **Greeta:** Thanks so much, David. I really appreciate you wanting to and get
  behind the covers folks like me just to really have a conversation
  authentically about what’s going on in the industry and where someone like I
  come from or other folks might come from. I think it makes all the problems in
  health care much more real and we’re not just talking in the buzzwords, which
  is always really helpful. I appreciate having a real conversation with you.


  **Dave:** We appreciate your authenticity as well. I knew you’d be terrific. I
  admire your leadership. I admire your social media presence as a leader. What
  I heard today is what I always hear from great leaders, they’re focused on
  growing their organization, but they’re also focused on growing the people.
  It’s a tall order, but it’s the right way to do things, so thank you for that
  example.


  **Greeta:** Thank you Dave. Thanks so much. Great to talk with you.


  **Dave:** We’ve been talking with Dr. Geeta Nayyar, MD, MBA, chief healthcare
  and innovation officer for Femwell Group Health. Geeta, thanks again for
  joining us. You’ve been listening to four by four health sponsored by Sansoro
  Health. Sansoro Health, integration at the speed of innovation. Check them out
  at www.sansorolhealth.com. I hope you’ll join us next time for another Four by
  Four discussion with healthcare innovators. Until then, I’m your host, Dr.
  Dave Levin. Thanks for listening.
---
In this podcast, we speak with Geeta Nayyar, M.D., M.B.A. about her experiences as the Chief Healthcare & Innovation Officer for Femwell Group Health, a management services organization (MSO). Dr. Nayyar shares her insights into how MSOs can drive performance improvement and “let doctors be doctors” by handling “the business side” of medical practice. We get an inside look at how Femwell is leveraging actionable information to fill gaps in care and optimize scheduling while improving patient satisfaction and practice performance under both fee-for-service and value-for-service models. Dr. Nayyar rounds out the discussion with a well-chosen pet-peeve and some sage advice.
  