---
id: 5OdeKihFtmzWR85dToa6Iu
title: A Conversation with the Father of FHIR
slug: the-father-of-fhir/
pub_date: '2019-06-11'
tags:
  - ehr
  - hl7
  - open-source
  - integration
  - api
  - podcast
  - interoperability
  - fhir
category_brand: true
share_image: /assets/general/podcasts/podcast-4x4-share-8-grieve.jpg
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  In this episode of 4x4 Health, we talk to Grahame Grieve, the
  architect-developer of HL7s Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR).
author: 1iL3zeL6PWrbLRgZE9x5Mf
guest: 5ucOd6EBGgs08WcMOIYyqm
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe title='A Conversation with the Father of FHIR'
  src='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/q4irg-b3d324?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  data-link='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/q4irg-b3d324?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  height='122' width='100%' style='border: none;' scrolling='no'
  data-name='pb-iframe-player' ></iframe>
transcript: >-
  **Dr. Dave:** Welcome to 4 x 4 Health, sponsored by Sansoro Health. Sansoro
  Health, integration at the speed of innovation. Check them out at
  [www.sansorohealth.com](http://www.sansorohealth.com). Today I’m talking with
  Graham Grieve, Principal with Health Intersections of Melbourne, Australia and
  Architect Developer of HL7’s Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources or
  FHIR, the specification that’s playing increasingly important role in the
  exchange of health information. Graham specializes in interoperability, one of
  the hottest topics in Health IT and for that matter, all of Healthcare IT. His
  approaches balance clinical, management and business perspectives with deep
  technical knowledge and strong leadership skills. He’s recognized as an
  international leader in the field who’s referred to by some as the Father of
  Five. Graham emphasizes the role that community plays in bringing about
  successful change, especially when developing useful standards. This holistic
  approach has led to remarkable early success and rapid adoption of FHIR. In
  addition to his work on international standards, Graham advises a wide variety
  of organizations on product development, clinical safety, integration,
  architecture and standards implementation in development. When he’s not
  traveling the world, Graham lives in Melbourne, Australia with his wife and
  two daughters. Graham plays the piano and the Didgeridoo and occasionally gets
  to go kayak fishing. Maybe we can get him to send a few recordings of him
  playing the Didgeridoo to put on our website. Now, before we get started, I
  have to deal with the issue of FHIR puns. Regular listeners know that we have
  a strict no FHIR puns policy on 4 x 4 Health. We’ve even occasionally had to
  call out the pun patrol to issue citations. Now, I have no idea how Graham
  feels about this subject, we haven’t discussed it. But given his essential
  role in the creation of FHIR, we’re suspending enforcement today and leaving
  it up to his judgment to pun or not. So, with that bit of business out of the
  way, welcome to a 4 x 4 Health, Graham.


  **Graham Grieve:** Thanks very much. Pleasure to be here.


  **Dave:** Let’s jump right in. I’m going to ask you a series of four questions
  and we’ll take about four minutes to discuss each one. So, to get us started,
  tell us a bit about yourself and your organization.


  **Graham:** So, I started life as a farmer in New Zealand. I thought I was
  going to do plant breeding research, so I often did Biochemistry University.
  Then I did a grand New Zealand thing and came to Australia for a holiday. I
  ran out of money and had to get a job. I was in Melbourne, I got a job, I got
  a house, I got a family, I’m still here. The job happened to be in a hospital
  lab. Within a week of study in the hospital lab I knew that I was going to be
  in healthcare the rest of my life. I worked in the lab; I did a bunch of IT
  work in the lab. I then did a PhD, although I never finished it. Then I went
  and worked for a lab system stand up and got more and more involved in
  interoperability, in HL7. Then I went freelancing, contracting, consulting and
  I realized early on in that process that really the standards we had in
  healthcare had been lifted a long way behind the rest of the world. And so, I
  said, okay, what would it look like if we took the lightest and brightest
  approach and used it for health? And so that turned into FHIR and it took off
  like a rocket. Notice I think I, \[Unclear\]. And, here I am trying to keep
  ahead of the on running ocean that’s trying to, you know, swallow us up. And
  it’s been an incredible journey that so far exceeded my hopes and aspirations
  and my worst fears same time and I’m just really gratified that we have such
  an active community that is changing the world and I’m a bit embarrassed that
  I get so much intention when it’s really such a place of community works, so
  many hundreds of individuals contribute to what we have, and so, I’m just
  really lucky. You said, you know, my organization, my organization, while I’m
  a freelancer, well, works for HL7 which you know, is a Standards Development
  Organization and a community convener, and then I have the FHIR community
  which is the best well defined but even more active and passionate group of
  people who really want to change healthcare and I’m just so thrilled to have
  those people onboard and I’m just hanging on and enjoying the ride.


  **Dave:** Well, that was a great initial overview and we’re definitely going
  to get a little deeper into the work and FHIR and the role of community and
  the rest of that. One of the themes I really like to explore in this podcast
  is folks that have come from outside of healthcare or the reasons that folks
  chose healthcare. You said something very intriguing, you said, within a week
  of working in the lab, you’d knew. Tell us a little bit more about that.


  **Graham:** When it was a faith-based thing, but I realized once I was working
  in the healthcare that it was bigger than a job, it was more than just money.
  There was a mission here. There’s lives to be saved, there’s people’s lives
  that make better. And that growing strongly might affect me and my own
  experiences have taught me that money’s a lot less important than health and
  happiness and I’m so thrilled to be part of an industry that thinks that way
  and has always done so. And it’s my pleasure to have so many people around me
  who see life the same way. And that is why I’ve always felt as though I will
  always work in healthcare and I’ve passed it onto my oldest daughter who’s now
  doing Chemistry at University with a strong focus on Medical Applications
  because she’s got that same bug to make the life better for people.


  **Dave:** Well, as you might imagine, a lot of us share that, that this idea
  of a mission that really matters. And the thing that I’ve always tried to
  point out to my colleagues is everyone involved shares in that mission.
  Whether you’re on the front lines providing clinical care or you’re building
  the systems or the facilities that enable that right on down up to and
  including the folks who clean up and make sure that the place is operational
  and like you, I take great joy in that and it’s sustained me through decades
  of ups and downs in healthcare. So, thank you for sharing that.


  **Graham:** Pleasure and it can be a tough gig to be in this as well. It makes
  demands of you that wouldn’t otherwise be made and that’s part actually, the
  best part of why I like it.


  **Dave:** I couldn’t agree more. There’s a lot of easier things to do in life
  and probably a lot of easier ways to make money too if that’s what you’re
  really about. So, it sounds like you and I are much aligned on that.


  **Graham:** Yeah.


  **Dave:** Let’s turn to FHIR for a few moments and we’ll start with some
  technical stuff but I, this idea of community I think is also really important
  and we’ll come back to that. But for a general audience, give us a quick
  definition of what FHIR is and what you and the FHIR community hope to
  accomplish with this approach?


  **Graham:** So, FHIR is a set of rules on how data is exchanged between
  systems. There’s a focus on APIs, although we have otherwise to exchange data.
  But it describes the kind of data that you can exchange, when you might
  exchange it and how you can exchange it. And by describing those things, we
  create the set of capabilities that allow applications that support humans
  providing healthcare to get the right information in the right place at the
  right time and to add value to that process and to allow humans to coordinate
  their process better. The drive in a specification in the community is very
  technical. How do you do things? But it’s absolutely about why do you do those
  things and what impact does it make? And our goal is to change the way
  healthcare has provided by enabling humans to leverage computers more
  effectively. IT never solves problems but IT can get in the way of humans
  solving problems. We’re about enabling clinical champions to say, I want to
  make practice better, I want to make lives better, I want to change the game
  and that’s so, we are definitely chasing after clinical change and that has
  become relevant now that we’ve built enough infrastructure but we did that by
  making it possible to do things that people want to do through better use of
  information.


  **Dave:** Yeah, I might, I think that’s a really good summary and my own view
  is that, our hope was that when we rolled out electronic health records that
  we would solve some of these problems, that the data would be less fragmented,
  that it would follow patients to wherever they went for care. And I think the
  reality is we achieved some of that but not enough. And, in some ways, we
  created new, very important silos for data but silos nevertheless. And in some
  ways, I think it is highlighted the importance of interoperability, the
  ability to exchange data and the role that, that’s playing in either
  inhibiting or enabling better care and better solutions, real innovation in
  healthcare. My guess is you would probably agree with a lot of that. But we do
  have another rule of 4 x 4 Health which is please call BS on the host and feel
  free to do so.


  **Graham:** No, I mean, I completely agree and what I’m hearing is that
  they’ve able to put in a lot of effort into gathering the information but
  they’re not feeling as if it’s worth it because it’s not able to be leveraged
  at the right place at the right time. And so, the right limiting step is very
  much interoperability and the challenges around that. And so, yeah, when I
  started working on FHIR, I was really simple. I’m saying, the web has
  transformed other industries. The web as it a set of ways of thinking and
  technologies and ways to build community is really powerful. Let’s unleash
  that in healthcare. I’ve been doing that really clever. I’m just committing to
  it and said, let’s, I’m going to do this and come and join me and people did.
  And it’s about bringing that change to, and acquiring it at the place that
  turns out to be the right limiting step. And across the whole world, people
  are in all sorts of different points in the journey about adopting clinical
  record, keeping software to some degree or other but everybody’s stuck onto
  interoperability.


  **Dave:** Yeah, and the other thing I really like about this approach is it’s
  really focused on practical outcomes. This was not an academic exercise that
  ends up sitting on a shelf somewhere but really focused on solving real world
  problems. Give us some examples of what you’re seeing right now of the
  practical application of the FHIR standard, who’s using it now and what are
  you seeing as benefits from that?


  **Graham:** So, I mean for, I usually come in on the academic thing. What we
  do is deeply informed by academic rigor and thinking but it’s matched by, to
  quote from an earlier stat, earlier podcast was, it’s matched by street cred
  and we have that street cred because we actually said, let’s try this stuff in
  practice as well. So, where are some things that people are using it? So,
  obviously the most, you know, hottest profile usage is the Patient Portal API
  that Argonaut community worked up. And so, it’s great to see that patient
  empowerment, patient agenda because I believe in that passionately. We have,
  you know, a lot of really active work now in improving the workflow between
  the provider and the payer in the Davinci project and that’s about to come
  online. Looking wider, I feel there’s a huge amount of work around gathering
  data, using FHIR’s interoperability layer to power, big data, data
  researching, AI, and the, bringing that, the lessons from that to bear in
  practice into the, you know, healthcare process. So, data analytics and
  decision support, there’s plenty of, it’s just clinical process work within
  vendors that’s not getting all of profile outside them but they’re saying, we
  can, you know, I, seamless clinical process across the different parts of
  their software using, you know, FHIR and so for me, nations building national
  clinical repositories or specific focus disease repository is based on the
  specification. And to me the great thing is it’s stable to help and solve all
  of those problems and my goal is, no matter how you want to improve
  healthcare, we believe that we want to be relevant in exchanging that
  information and useful to you to do that.


  **Dave:** That’s a really good response and I want to be clear if I didn’t
  intend to demean academic research in any way. The point being that, you know,
  the ability to take that evidence, science, you know, academic learnings and
  apply that in practical ways that really make a difference in the real world
  is a real art, I think and something I really admire and I think you described
  that well. Where do you see this going, what’s coming next, how do you see the
  standard evolving, how do you see adoption playing out in the coming months
  and years?


  **Graham:** So, the standard is mature and now, it’s moved from, you know,
  initially I said, what is it look like to have an agile standard? And so, we
  had a very agile standard and that was, you know, led to the process where we
  have the connected thumb driven development. But every time it became clear
  that, that’s really great way to initialize in initiated community. But over
  time you become more sensitive to the need for stability and you actually need
  change list because so many people have invested in what we’re doing. And in
  fact, this is sociology, it’s not technology. And my following Tuckman’s
  stages of group development, storming, forming, forming, storming, norming.
  We’re getting towards the norming phase now and we still have other parts of
  the, some parts of the specification are very early. In the storming phase,
  we’re adding support for evidence-based medicine which no one’s ever made
  computable and interoperable before. So, that would be really interesting
  process. Whereas the stuff that’s stable is, you know, really starting to get
  quite stable and make it normative and which means, you know, we make it, we
  don’t change it without considerable procedural challenge. But my view has
  been that, the way it kind of build a trillion-dollar ecosystem on top of
  FHIR. That’s about the amount of money that people will spend in the spice
  controlled by FHIR. They’re not going to spend it on FHIR, they’re going to
  spend it on projects that use FHIR. It might be a trillion dollars worldwide
  and you’re going to have a trillion dollars’ worth of governance and
  stability. So, what we have is the process that migrates that and we’re
  starting to get that maturity now and now we’re saying, how do we support the
  process of making use of it, leave reaching it, supporting vendors that are
  rolling it out, reaching out to new communities that we haven’t interacted
  with before, like for instance, HIMS and HL7. They’ve always kind of been
  parallel universes but now we’re saying to HIM, HIMS is saying, we’ll be
  talking ins and saying, what does it look like to start really influencing
  Healthcare IT practice through deployment of interoperability? What can we
  learn, what can we pass on, how do we do community in that new space? And I
  think that’s in the short term. In the longer term, I always said we had three
  goals. The first is to disrupt Healthcare IT standards and that’s pretty much
  bagged. They even the standards that are not FHIR, are all busy trying to
  figure out how to, you know, have a process like what we have because it
  works, because we’re building community as we’ve hammered away on. Then we set
  out to change Healthcare IT and that’s a process that’s obvious and happening.
  It’s not complete by any stretch of the imagination. But then I said, and we
  want to change health and that for me, that’s where their focus is starting to
  be more. Now that it’s time for us to say, how do we change healthcare and
  healthcare outcomes, not just Healthcare IT. And that’s a, that’s an ongoing
  discussion that needs another new set of communities to be built and that’s
  where we are starting to turn our attention to now, how do we leverage
  Healthcare IT and the healthcare outcomes and even things that are in
  coordinated care, continuity of the care, managed care plans and said ongoing
  process.


  **Dave:** The thing that I find particularly fascinating and impressive about
  this work, and there’s a lot to admire in it, is the thought that’s been put
  into the change management aspects of this. And you said, we’re hammering this
  issue of community but I think too often we embark on trying to implement
  change in healthcare and we really haven’t thought through. What exactly is
  the model for change, what’s our theory of how we’re going to affect change?
  We get really excited about the details of the work and perhaps the technical
  aspects of the work or in a quality improvement program. Maybe we are really
  focused on, what does the evidence tell us and the gaps and approaches which
  is all really valuable but we don’t seem to spend as much time thinking about
  the human aspects of this and, you know, how do we actually affect real change
  in the world? And I just find it so striking that what outsiders might look at
  and go, well, this is just a technical exercise. How much emphasis you place
  on that and at the risk of beating it further to death. Share with us a little
  more about, you know, your views on this and how it’s played out across the
  FHIR community.


  **Graham:** Well, this is my reign, you know. I wonder if I, three rules of
  interoperability and one that really drives it. Since that interoperability is
  not a technology problem, interoperability is a people problem. It was a long
  time ago since we had a technology problem and we’d all be better off if we
  stepped, stopped talking about IT. We don’t have an IT problem; we have an
  information management and a people problem. And so, where you catch on from
  the start, this is not a technology project, this is a people project. And so,
  that’s why I always will hammer community because we are fundamentally a
  people project. That health is a people-based business, it changes the
  people-based process. And so, we said, the most important thing we can do is
  build a community and banish through that and then everything that we do
  manifests through people. And so, we’d just hammer around on this point
  internally and externally. And when we say, how are we going? We don’t, we
  don’t actually worry about how the standards going. When I sit down with a
  team and we go around the table strengths and weaknesses, when I’m talking
  about the spec way, I’m talking about the community because that is the most
  important thing that we have and that we contribute our culture and our
  existence and the wild passion that drives the community to engage all over
  the place. It’s that engagement that generates the noise that gets people to
  say, oh, what is it you’re actually doing? And then they come on and they’re
  like, can you just like leave us alone, don’t make us change? We’re happy with
  where they are. So, there’s this kind of initial resistance always happens and
  then they look at what actually doing and they go, ah, oh, that’s cool. And
  then they’re on board and that, you know, we’ve seen, it’s like you throw a
  stone into a pond and you’re watching the ripples spreading out and we’re
  seeing them stretch more further and further away from the core of interop and
  further into health. And you know, our goal is, how to change health outcomes
  in the end? That’s in the end from that comes back to people. So, this is it
  something you’re happy to rant about, I’m very passionate about but it’s not a
  technology problem where we have to stop thinking of it as a technology
  problem. It’s an information and people problem.


  **Dave:** Well, I’m glad you went right to your rant. I didn’t, ask you that
  question yet but it was perfect. And also, I usually have to warn my guests to
  keep it PG-13 which, you know we try to be family friendly but you did that
  beautifully as well. I frankly don’t think it’s much of a rant, I think you’re
  spot on and to my point earlier, I think regardless of what you’re doing,
  whether it’s in healthcare or at home or self-improvement, the principles are
  the same. And you chose the word engagement earlier which is a real hot button
  word for me. I define it in this setting as communication plus governance.


  **Graham:** That community, the rant that it is, you know, we’ve got a
  national health record system here in Australia. It’s really limited in
  functionality because it was based on political compromises to how we could
  even build a national identify, a national healthcare system. Fine! That was,
  we knew it was going to be limited because of political reality, but what
  happened is we’ve, we’re trying to get to the point where we can have an open
  discussion about the real problems, around clinical trust, clinical
  engagement, clinical governance, clinical commitment to shared record keeping
  or seamless data exchange which is a two way obligation but the doctors have
  walked away from it thinking that’s a technology problem and a technology
  failure. And that’s my real issue is clinicians keep thinking that fixing
  clinical practice is a technology problem. That’s not a rant, it’s not a
  technology problem. You have to think about how to share a common clinical
  practice and then you have to think about how to have clinical, bi-directional
  clinical obligations around data exchange and patient exchange. It’s not, you
  kind of stopped saying technology is going to solve the problem. Technology
  will automate whatever your solution to the problem is and if your solution to
  the problem isn’t going to work, the technology will automate the work not
  working this of it. That’s fine for the writers, no problem.


  **Dave:** I think that’s really well said and as I was thinking about, you’re
  talking about this perspective and for better or worse, I’ve been deep into
  the proposed rules from the Office of National Coordinator in United States
  and the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare and I think it reflects exactly what
  you’re saying here. Yes, there are technical aspects to the proposed rules.
  Those are relatively straightforward and I would think very pleasing to you
  and an endorsement of the work with the FHIR community, since it says pretty
  bluntly, we’re all going to adopt and use a FHIR standard and we’re going to
  use that to deliver a defined core set of data. What’s been much more
  interesting to me, fascinating to me about these rules is the other aspects,
  that the, what I refer to as the behavioral aspects or the people part as you
  call it which really get into information blocking and noncompetitive
  practices, anti-competitive practices, things like that. That I agree with you
  100%, a far more responsible for the barriers that exist today than any
  technical issues.


  **Graham:** Actually, I have to come in a couple of things on what you said
  there. First of all is, I wouldn’t say, have been tremendous supporters of as
  both conceptually and financially and I have to acknowledge Don Rucker’s
  support in particular. It’s really critical to contribute to our ability to
  deal with that technical debt and I really appreciate that. And I want to say
  about ONC is you really under appreciate how wonderful it is to have political
  leaders who truly understand the problem, truly understand interoperability
  and healthcare and clinical process. When I visit countries, political leaders
  in the rest of the world, they have no idea. They really, really don’t have
  any idea. And I hear a lot of frustration with the governance process in the
  United States but from where I sit, try better than elsewhere. I understand
  the frustration and you know, there’s my, we’re all here, we’re dealing with a
  series of compromises at crest, multiple different levels. Every compromise
  you make will, you know, at least some people as the, holding the bag. But we
  are going in the FHIR community as well, it’s not perfect. It’s a way of
  making a series of compromises that leaves enough people committed to the
  community. And that’s I think how people need to look at the work of the ONC
  and the CMS and so forth is, you know, nothing is perfect, political processes
  deeply compromised, how do we make the best out of what we’ve got and it seems
  to me that things could be worse.


  **Dave:** Well, you and I very much share that view and I’m publicly on record
  as praising ONC for the work that they’ve been doing. It’s not, it’s a very
  popular pastime in the United States to bash our Federal Government and a lot
  of times it’s deserved. But I think this is a real exception here. I think
  they’ve done good work. They’re good people, they’re well intended and I’ve
  also found them to be particularly accessible and interested in the public’s
  input. And so, I share that view with you. I think your overall summary is
  spot on.


  **Graham:** And don’t worry! Bashing the government is a natural human pastime
  in every country I’ve been to, even by the Government itself.


  **Dave:** That’s right indeed. If you’ve just joined us, you’re listening to 4
  x 4 Health and we’re talking with Graham Grieve, Principal with Health
  Intersections and Architect Developer of HL7, FHIR. I want to give you a
  chance to continue any additional rants. Is there anything else you want to
  add; any pet peeves you want to get on the record Graham before we turn to
  other topics?


  **Graham:** Now look, I’ve done my big peeve about technology, information and
  people. I guess if there was another thing that in HL7, we engage with about a
  thousand vendors, they all understand the standards game, why we have
  standards, how it influences their work, how they influence the standards
  process and what it achieves. But a lot of people assume that means that we
  just have seamless information exchange but as long as institutions buy highly
  configurable systems and then spend hundreds of billions of dollars
  configuring those systems, they’re next hundreds of billions of dollars of
  worth of non-interoperability and we can’t change that. If people come to us
  and say, can you just make a rule that we can have consistent information,
  that would mean by the way we work with building community rather than
  imposing top down fantasies that we would have to engage with a 100,000
  institutions that don’t even know why we’re bothering to do that. And so, it’s
  this cultural change to say, that standardization process matters. So, when I
  expect the outcome of what we’re doing will be, that in 10 years’ time people
  will be saying, that FHIR standard is so short, is full of shortcomings
  because now, we’re ready to actually hard code those agreements, because
  people have actually said, you know what, that’s holding us back. Let’s all
  come to agreement. And then now they like 10 years later going, but the FHIR
  could standard doesn’t reflect those agreements because we finally made them.
  And so, a standards process is inherently self limiting. You get to the top of
  the mountain and set out to climb and you’ve run out of energy, and you’ve run
  out of freedom, and it’s time for some other mountain but man, we have made
  that other projects problem so big by the sheer size of the community persist
  that we’ve built. How much energy it’s going to the take to do it again,
  really scary. So, we’ve just got to make the best of what we can now and hope
  that we last as long as we can, that’s best. You know, my goal is always when
  I say the community is with developing for technology, eventually we’re going
  to run out of steam, we’re going to have that, you know, dreaded, gotten a
  trough of despair. Let’s just make sure the fundamentals are in place as much
  as possible, both in the community and the technology. And the better the
  fundamentals are, the more prepared will be when those hard times come.


  **Dave:** Well, I really admire that. I mean, I think it’s a, that’s a great
  blend of humility and vision and I sort of view it the same way. I think most
  the progress is we take a few steps forward and then maybe a step back and
  maybe we go sideways a little and then we regroup and we take a few more steps
  forward and, but over time incrementally, directionally things are good. So, I
  really appreciate and you’re sort of given me an opening to ask another
  question and you and I’ve never discussed this, so I can’t wait to see where
  this goes. But how do you view the sort of interplay between standards and
  custom and proprietary work? How do they fit together or do they fit together?


  **Graham:** Yeah, they absolutely do. The first part is, the whole point of
  standardizing something is to allow for innovation to be built on top of it.
  And so, this is real art form around what do you standardize and what do you
  leave because you can end up standardizing exactly what people need to
  innovate in and then you just killing everything, or you can standardize some
  infrastructure and create an explosion of innovation on top of that. And so,
  this is real. I’d form around, what is it that you standardize and what do you
  not? And then this is also this process interchange between do you, you know,
  you can only standardize after some, at least some form of in, you know,
  production, implementation is shown benefit and shown outcomes. And say, you
  need to innovate; you can’t innovate that much in the community. You
  standardize what’s been innovated. And so, there’s this process, you know,
  stepwise process between standards and innovation. And I actually often show
  in my presentations, I show a picture of a slinky dog in, when I’m talking
  about this. You know, the front in the end but I can go on different
  directions for a while but eventually they’re going to snap back together and
  it’s going to be painful if you stretch it too far. And so, it’s really an art
  form of keeping those two things working together to get the best outcome in
  the end. But that’s how I look at that question.


  **Dave:** Well boy, I really liked the slinky dog analogy. I think I may have
  to appropriate that for future use. Wayne Cubic and I’ve had this discussion
  and Wayne is the Chief Technology Officer for HL7 as you of course know. And
  what the way I drew it was as a Yin and a Yang that they’re sort of closely
  intertwined. And, my argument was, look, where the standards exist in their
  robust, we should use those. It provides great advantage but there’s also this
  kind of voyage of discovery. And so, we want people out on the bleeding edge,
  experimenting, doing custom work that, that can inform the development of
  standards in potentially two ways. So, one is, it’s a kind of signal of what’s
  the market think is important right now. And the second is, it may provide
  insights into actually executing that, the details of developing a
  standardized version. And Wayne and I, we agreed on that as a model. His push
  back was, yeah, but I want that standards part to grow bigger and bigger over
  time and the custom part to be a smaller part of the Yin and Yang. And, I have
  to say, I agree, I think that could be valuable as well. But at the end of the
  day, I think your slinky dog analogy may be a more powerful one, more fitting
  than the Yin and the Yang.


  **Graham:** Yeah, yeah. I listened to your exchange with Brian about data.
  Brian of course in HL7 is my boss. And I thought that you didn’t cover was
  that the relationship between standards and pairing innovation at a different
  level. And I think that’s really critical. Being, writing a standard, it’s
  like, starting a startup, 90% of them fail. You don’t set out to have a
  failing startup or assigning standard but you often do and I’ve put a lot of
  time into figuring out why standards failed or not. When I, before I started
  FHIR and part was the necessity to have community and it can be driven by
  that. And so, I turned the persons inside that. Nearly part of it was just
  doing improve my chances of success. But it’s really, you know, a lot of the
  FHIR process is just an experimental process of finding out of the balance
  between what we should or shouldn’t standardize.


  **Dave:** I think that’s really interesting. Elaborate on what you mean about
  the standardization enabling innovation.


  **Graham:** Well, so let’s talk about as an example. Well, I mean it’s a whole
  side of using APIs, right? If I say to everybody, to 25 hospitals, having an
  API is a great idea. Go off and build an
  [API](https://www.sansorohealth.com/api-learning-center/). 25 hospitals, go
  off and build an API and then I say a bunch of companies, you can build apps
  against the APIs in the company’s site, right? 25 different APIs, all looking
  totally different. We can innovate, I guess. Now, you said of this for 25
  hospitals, here’s the API, common API. We all do the same API and they’re
  like, hey, we can’t innovate without APIs. Yes right, you can’t innovate with
  the APIs. But when you go to those other companies and say, here’s APIs going
  away, they go, hey, they all the same. Do you know how much bigger the market
  is? And that the economics of scale enable innovation at the other level. And
  it’s the same, you know, like when, I live in Australia, when we first started
  building railway lines, you know what happened? Every state, every region
  chose a different route and gauge. That was a nightmare. Eventually, the
  Government said, it’s too hard and actually paid to impose a single rally
  gauge on the entire country. But that created a national training system where
  that was actually supported by National Railway System. And that was
  innovation that was built on top of the standard rail gauge. And, but if I
  turned around and said, okay, here’s the standard for clinical, for
  information about allergies, everybody in the world is going to record exactly
  this same allergy information. Is that going to help or hinder innovation,
  right? You can see that it could help innovation and you can also see that
  will hinder innovation, which isn’t. The only way we know, obviously try it
  and find out. And so, the FHIR process is really about discovery of the answer
  to that question. Where should we standardize and what should we know?


  **Dave:** Well, I just, I really admire the philosophy behind this and I think
  you’re right and I think we’re beginning to see the fruits of this already.
  And again, at the end of the day, I think your insight that a lot of this is
  art and you have to experiment and you may have hypothesis but you’ve got to
  experiment and go prove that out in the real world. And again, it’s what’s
  been so fascinating to me about reading about this work and listening to you
  today is this philosophy on this approach. And boy, it’s hard to argue with
  the success that it’s achieved so far.


  **Graham:** Well, yeah, I mean, I feel blessed that so many people have jumped
  on and said, that set of compromises and philosophy is something that we could
  commit to and build empires on. And I very much hope that we can hold two
  echoes and justify that faith.


  **Dave:** Well, you’ve offered a lot of sage advice here today. As our final
  question, let me ask you for a formally, what is your most sage advice for us?


  **Graham:** You know, I’m going to do something really personal. I believe
  that everyone of us should spend some of our time committing to something
  greater than we are. Giving to some community organization that’s building
  civic assets and not only do I believe that we should each do that and I
  encourage everybody to do that and to join some organization, whether it’s
  FHIR or a derivative organization of FHIR, working and how to build something
  you never liked it’s space or whether it’s your local, you know, sports club,
  I believe that every who are employer says to the employees, I’m going to give
  you a little bit of your time to give to something greater than the employer.
  That builds, not employees but committed what, you know, people who are really
  committed to your vision because you’re giving them time to do that giving.
  And so, I was encouraged employers to let their employees give to something
  greater. And that’s my sage advice.


  **Dave:** Well, it’s truly sage and I couldn’t agree more, in my own
  experience in and observing others. When we go do that, when we commit to
  something larger than ourselves, when we give back, it’s also, it’s a great
  remedy for cynicism, for frustration, for self-pity, you know, and we’re all
  subject to those things, we’re human. I find it to be incredibly regenerative.
  And so, in addition to being something that’s good for the community, I think
  it’s really good for us as individuals as well. So, truly sage advice and good
  advice for life, not just for work.


  **Graham:** Nice.


  **Dave:** We’ve been talking with Graham Grieve, Principal with Health
  Intersections and Architect Developer of HL7, FHIR. Graham, thanks so much for
  joining us today.


  **Graham:** It’s been a pleasure and I didn’t even get any FHIR puns in.


  **Dave:** Well, like I said, you were totally on your own. We left it to your
  discretion today, \[Laughing\]. So, the restrictions will be back in place
  after this episode.


  **Graham:** Good, I’m glad.


  **Dave:** You’ve been listening to 4 x 4 Health, sponsored by Sansoro Health.
  Sansoro Health, integration at the speed of innovation. Check them out at
  [www.sansorohealth.com](http://www.sansorohealth.com). I hope you’ll join us
  next time for another 4 x 4 discussion with healthcare innovators. Until then,
  I’m your host Dr. Dave Levin, thanks for listening.
---
In this episode of 4x4 Health, we talk to Grahame Grieve, the architect-developer of [HL7](https://www.sansorohealth.com/what-is-hl7/)s [Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR)](https://www.sansorohealth.com/what-is-fhir/) and principle at Health Intersections of Melbourne, Australia.  Grahame is one of the world’s foremost experts on healthcare interoperability, a strong leader of the Health IT community, and is sometimes referred to as the ‘Father of FHIR.’ “\[Interoperability\] is not a technology problem . . . It’s an information and people problem”, Grahame observes before describing how FHIR was able to break through this ‘people problem’ by using a collaborative and community driven approach. Grahame’s passion for improving healthcare outcomes with technologies like FHIR shines throughout the episode. We think you will leave this episode inspired and optimistic about an interoperable future for healthcare.
  