---
id: 1ALRI4PGlWY6O6QCoG248w
title: >-
  Dr. Sanjeev Arora — Improving rural access to care: the role technology plays
  and the value of telehealth
slug: dr-sanjeev-arora-improving-rural-access-to-care-the-role-technology-plays
pub_date: '2017-06-30'
tags:
  - tags/telemedicine
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  The *Healthcare Innovators Podcast* brings Dr. Sanjeev Arora to you this month
  to discuss how technology plays a role in improved access to care for rural
  areas. Dr. Arora  is the Director of [Project ECHO](http://echo.unm.edu/
  "Project ECHO online at UNMHSC") (Extension for Community Healthcare
  Outcomes). He  developed the Project ECHO model as a platform for service
  delivery, education and evaluation. It took off in New Mexico; now it’s going
  around the globe. Dr. Arora is truly making a difference in healthcare today
  and we’re delighted he has stopped by to share his thoughts on healthcare
  access.
author: 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
guest: CFsdmSunQswk0AuKuyIGQ
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no"
  src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/330974325&amp;color=1055ff&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=true&amp;show_comments=false&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false"></iframe>
key_takeaways: >-
  1. Learn what Project ECHO is and how it is making a difference in rural
  access to care

  2. Get the inside track on how one doctor feels about the state of
  interoperability 

  3. Hear how Project ECHO plans to reach a billion lives by 2025

  4. Discover which big data can impact telehealth in the near future
---
### Dr. Arora responds:

**On the current reach of Project ECHO:** "We are connected with 120 academic centers that have launched Project ECHO. It is being done for 57 different disease areas; it is a rapidly expanding project. In addition to the 120 or so that have launched, there are also 200 more organizations that have signed collaborative agreements with us to launch Project ECHO.

> In order to really change the way the world works for these underserved patients, one has to change the way it is distributed.

**On the current state of telehealth:** "I think [the technologies] are fairly well developed now. They are sort of plug and play and I don't see that as a technical gap. I think in terms of remote sensing there probably needs to be further progress. And I think this should happen in the next decade or so."

**On challenges and progress in telehealth:** "I think another problem that I see in telehealth is really not a telehealth problem, but it is lack of interoperability of the electronic medical records in the U.S. healthcare system. Essentially, if a patient doesn't belong to your particular hospital or practice then you can't really see their electronic health records."

"Other areas of progress for the future are big data and really interpreting all these new feeds that are coming in and creating intelligent outputs which are actionable. So there are many areas where I see a lot of progress will occur in the future."

**On interoperability:** "It's a source of great frustration for all of us who practice medicine... that we can't get our act together to really develop a common platform where interoperability can offer the ability to see the patient's data from any point of contact by the patient and their provider. I think that's a sad thing, because many other systems have already done that. The VA does it; in other countries they've done that. I think it leads to bad patient outcome, so I'm hopeful that we can make greater progress in the future."

"The problem could be solved in one stroke by law which would say that beyond, let's say 2020, no healthcare provider or health system would get paid; no electronic medical record could exist unless there was this interoperability. It would get solved instantly, if there was regulation like that."

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/5y-nbc3I9oM?rel=0&amp;showinfo=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

_Project ECHO overview, from the GE Developing Health Summit_

**On Project ECHO reaching one billion lives by 2025:** "The reason for the big number like a billion is the fact that we've done some research in the United States where we ask the providers a very simple question: *Is specialty access an area need for you?* We published this data that showed 4.9 out of 5 providers said yes. Essentially in the United States, where we have more specialists than any other country in the world, they say they can't access specialty care easily. So in order to really change the way the world works for these underserved patients, one has to change the way it is distributed."
  