---
id: 69AoV4ZUR1jt5OOwVj31Ex
title: Air-Traffic Control for Patient Care
slug: air-traffic-control-for-patient-care
pub_date: '2019-02-26'
tags:
  - startups
  - workflows
  - innovation
  - api
  - podcast
  - interoperability
category_brand: true
share_image: /assets/general/podcasts/podcast-4x4-share-23-franks.jpg
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  In this episode, we talk with Angie Franks, CEO and President of Central
  Logic, about the importance of real-time actionable information in healthcare.
author: 1iL3zeL6PWrbLRgZE9x5Mf
guest: 2A4hqbT9KzQo01OYiNvXMm
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe title='Air-Traffic Control for Patient Care'
  src='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/isaaw-a8a0b5?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  data-link='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/isaaw-a8a0b5?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  height='122' width='100%' style='border: none;' scrolling='no'
  data-name='pb-iframe-player' ></iframe>
transcript: >-
  **Dr. Dave Levin:** Welcome to 4 x 4 Health, sponsored by Sansoro Health.
  Sansoro Health, integration at the speed of innovation, check them out at
  [www.sansorohealth.com](https://www.sansorohealth.com). I am your host, Dr.
  Dave Levin. Today I am talking with Angie Franks, President and CEO of Central
  Logic. Angie has been a leader at High Growth Technology for more than 25
  years. When it comes to Healthcare IT, she has expertise in clinical,
  financial information systems, enterprise resource planning, telemedicine and
  software as a service solutions. Her company, Central Logic is a healthcare
  software and solutions company that focuses on helping healthcare clients
  achieve meaningful outcomes by converting data to real-time usable information
  across the healthcare spectrum. The result is a positive impact on patient
  care and financial outcomes achieved by reducing readmissions, lowering length
  of stay and increasing patient satisfaction and volumes. I met Angie a few
  years ago when she and I and Jeremy Pierotti, CEO of Sansoro, squeezed into
  the back seat of a Camaro to share a ride. I can tell you that it was an
  entertaining experience but past that, I think we’ve agreed not to discuss the
  event today. Welcome to 4 x 4 Health, Angie.


  **Angie Franks:** Thanks, Dave. It is so good to be here and actually
  enjoyable to relive that moment from the car ride.


  **Dave:** Yeah, but I think we should let what happened in the Camaro stay in
  the Camaro.


  **Angie:** Let’s let it stay in the Camaro, yes.


  **Dave:** \[Laughing\] Angie, we’re really delighted to have you here and
  let’s get right into it. I am going to ask you a series of four questions and
  we’ll take about four minutes to discuss each one. So, the first question is,
  tell us a bit more about yourself and your organization.


  **Angie:** Sure. Well, as you, so well said at the beginning, I am Angie
  Frankston, the CEO of Central Logic. We are a technology company that serves
  the health systems across the United States and we serve them and providing
  technology for a function within the hospital called the Transfer Centre and
  the Transfer Centre has played a really important role in ensuring that
  patients that are in an acute state, and they might be at a rural hospital or
  at a community hospital or in a physician’s office but they really need to be
  in the hospital, that we, we have software and technology that helps
  facilitate transferring that patient to the right facility and our vision
  statement which kind of sums up what we do really well is right care, right
  location without delay.


  **Dave:** That’s really terrific and this whole point of this has been a
  recurring theme in these podcasts and it’s this idea of actionable information
  and what I liked so much about the description of your company is that, the
  part where you’re talking about, you know, achieving meaningful outcomes by
  converting data to real-time usable information. So often I feel like we are
  collecting data or reporting things but not in a way that folks can readily
  take action. Does this resonate with you and if so, can you talk a little bit
  about that?


  **Angie:** Yeah, absolutely. It’s such a great question. So, in today’s world,
  what we’re seeing, the evolution of the transfer centres, it’s really evolving
  into the cornerstone for command centres or operations centres within health
  systems. The clinically staffed call centre where nurses and physicians and
  EMTs in the moment are making decisions about where to place a patient that’s
  coming into the health system, what’s the right location for that patient to
  be at based on their level of care needs, what facility has availability or
  what bed or what unit has availability for that patient. Real-time connect
  that sending physician with the receiving or the accepting physician and that
  is connecting those docs on to a call where the on-call physician that’s
  appropriate for that particular patient can in the moment get that update on
  what the status is of the patient, what their needs are and make the decision
  there to say, yes, I’ll accept that patient and let’s, let’s have that patient
  routed to this facility in this bed and we will get that patient on to a
  better, you know, hopefully in the best health outcome possible. So, making
  those adjustments, making those decisions in real time, using data that is
  updated. You know, we’re pulling data in from all over different systems and
  different parts of the health system but it’s giving those clinicians in the
  moment when the patient is highly acute or in you know, urgent need to be
  received in a higher level of patient care. We’re giving them the ability to
  make those decisions at that time. It has great outcomes, you know, for the
  patient and it’s got great outcomes for the health system as well and
  ultimately provides a good experience for the referring physician.


  **Dave:** But this is a category of solution that at that I think of is kind
  of like air traffic control. I imagine all days it’s almost as complex as try
  to manage air traffic at a busy airport. You mentioned outcomes, tell us a
  little bit more about what you’ve seen in terms of real-world results.


  **Angie:** Yeah, well time matters when you’ve got a patient in an acute state
  that they really need to get the right level of care at the right time, every
  minute it takes to make that patient transfer happen is a minute that has not
  been spent on, on getting the patients the care that they need. One of the
  more poignant stories that stand out for me is our company was founded by a
  physician who had this problem and I think just in general, those are the best
  technology companies are companies that are formed by people that had actually
  lived and experienced this problem and he had a patient in a community
  hospital that and, our, this gentleman, is a hospitalist who he believed was
  suffering from a dissecting aorta. So, a really critical case and he needed to
  move that patient very quickly into a cardiac speciality hospital. It took two
  and a half hours and ten phone calls to make that transfer happen. The patient
  outcome in that case, ended up being good. The patient got to the right place,
  they stabilize and handled the cardiac situation, but it was so tenuous those
  hours, two and a half hours to facilitate that transfer, that patient could
  have died in his hospital room in front of his eyes and now is really the
  impetus and the motivation to begin and launch Central Logic. So, those are
  the types of impact that we see every day and we hear about every day from our
  clients that are in real time making these decisions to facilitate treatment
  quickly.


  **Dave:** Yeah, and in addition to the impact on that patient, what I’ve seen
  in my own work as well a sort of a second-order impact on other patients
  because if there’s someone in a bed, let’s say in a critical care unit but
  could be transferred somewhere else, it’s almost like a chain reaction and as
  you expedite the placement of patients at lower levels of care, it creates
  capacity in other parts of the system. So, the benefit I think is not just to
  that one patient which obviously is important as huge, there’s a system effect
  to it. Do you see that as well?


  **Angie:** Absolutely. When you’ve got a patient occupying a bed, that is not
  the appropriate bed for that patient to occupy, you’re taking away from the
  care that someone else that needs that bed more acutely. You’re taken away
  from the care that, that patient needs. It’s also costly to the health system
  to have the wrong patients placed in the wrong facilities or in the wrong bed.
  I think you know, we all understand that a hospital bed is not really an
  available bed unless it’s staffed, and the staffing is appropriate to the
  acuity and the level of care of that unit or that hospital. So, to put a
  patient that could be sitting, receiving, you know, appropriate care in a
  community hospital to put those patients in a level one trauma centre might
  not be the best thing for that patient, that could have been in the community
  hospital. It consumes a bed at the trauma centre, it makes one not available
  for a patient that needs it more urgently. So, you’re absolutely right.
  There’s a domino effect across the system and it affects patient care, it
  affects the physician experience and it affects the financial outcomes for the
  health system.


  **Dave:** So, obviously you guys are involved in a number of different
  activities. What’s the most interesting or important thing you’re working on
  right now?


  **Angie:** Oh, as you know, there’s so many to choose from but I think the
  most interesting is when, when I consider what, what we’ve just the
  conversation that we’ve just been having about, about what we do and I think
  about the dynamics in the market today, so what’s happening in our healthcare
  industry. We are still predominantly a fee for service driven industry and the
  majority of reimbursements and contracts that health systems are getting
  reimbursed on our fee for service-based arrangements. With that said, we are
  underway in a shift to fee for value and even if that’s a couple percent or 5%
  or 25% of the revenue coming into the health system, you know, is not a fee
  for a value-based contract. Bridging that transition and having the ability to
  make decisions about patient placement and logistics and navigation for where
  route a patient and accepting the transfer and aligning the appropriate
  resources inside the health system and adjusting those levels and forecasting
  and predicting those levels, it becomes more and more critical as we try to
  bridge this transition. Like I said earlier, it’s going to have a significant
  financial impact on the health system today. This bridging, this transition
  from fee for service to fee for value is a significant operational impact for
  the health system and our transfer centre, that’s really becoming the command
  centre for the health system as a way for hospitals to operate effectively,
  make good decisions effectively under both environments and you know, have the
  impact for the health system of maximizing their financial outcomes and
  maximizing the clinical outcomes for the patient. So, for me, it’s exciting to
  be part of helping the health system, navigate through that change and bridge
  that transition into a world that we’re all going to live in for a long time
  and that is one where you’ve got to live in fee for service and fee for value
  simultaneously.


  **Dave:** So, I think this is really important and I want to drill a little
  bit deeper on it because I often feel like when I am in these conversations,
  we all recognize we’re living with a foot in each canoe right now and I see
  people get sort of frustrated and flummoxed by that and quite frankly, I don’t
  understand it because it seems to me that solution like yours can be valuable
  and effective in either model. Now, I understand that maybe do answers and you
  may attack different problems or different priorities but the way you’ve
  described it, it sounds like to me this is exactly what you’re doing. In fact,
  that it’s a one size fits all but that’s not the approach can be adapted to
  the current nick. Is this making sense, or you know, you’re free to call BS on
  me. I encouraged my guests to do that but am I making sense here at all?


  **Angie:** Oh, you’re making total sense is that, that is exactly you know, we
  help the health system operate effectively with their feet in both pools and
  while the majority of revenue for the majority of health systems today comes
  from fee for service-based arrangements. The need for becoming more proactive
  for reaching out to patients after they’ve been discharged and ensuring they
  don’t get readmitted for a condition, you know, for their discharge condition
  or proactively reaching out to patients that have chronic disease that need to
  be monitored and managed remotely with clinical staff. These are all
  capabilities that can be handled in this clinically staffed command centre
  that health systems are today beginning to put in place and operate because
  they see that at mixed, you know, continuing to shift. You know, at the end of
  the day, I mean this is my thought, at the end of the day, the way we will
  operate, when you think about what you need to do as a health system to
  operate effectively and make a margin and you know, stay in business in a fee
  for value world is you’ve got to focus on prevention and wellness and keep
  people as much as possible out of the health system. We see, I think we, we’ve
  probably have all seen hospitals are starting down this much more
  decentralized, you know, path where you can go to a freestanding ED or you can
  go to the CVS free or flu shot or preventative care. You’ve got primary care
  physicians, you’ve got hospitalists seeing patients inside the walls of the
  hospital. Pulling that all together and making sure the right decision gets
  made for the patient whether that’s in the heat of the moment or proactively
  and preventatively. This is an opportunity for this role of the command
  centre, the clinically staffed command centre to really help enable the best
  patient care in a more cost-effective coordinated manner.


  **Dave:** And, as you pointed out, it can work in a variety of settings. You
  just have to be thoughtful about what your priorities are and how you’re going
  to attack.


  **Angie:** Yeah, yeah, you know, I think, I think the fee for value is no
  different than managed care of, you know, the early 1990’s. The only
  difference is we now have the technology, we have digitized medical record, we
  have different roles than we had back then. So, we have roles like
  hospitalists who just take care of patients in the hospital. The role of the
  primary care physician is different than what it had been back in the 1990’s.
  So, you still need some fulcrum, some point to help coordinate care and, and
  decision making for the patient and for the health system, so you don’t have
  leakage and attrition of those patients and that can all happen out of your
  command centre.


  **Dave:** I am afraid, I’m old enough to have seen that movie in the ‘90s and
  I’ve seen some of it, but I agree with you. It looks and feels different to me
  this time, it feels more solid and more likely to succeed. If you’ve just
  joined us, you’re listening to 4 X 4 Health and we’re talking with Angie
  Franks, President and CEO of Central Logic. Now Angie, for this next question,
  I want to remind you just like I do all of my guests, this show is PG-13, so
  let’s keep this family friendly but what’s your favourite pet peeve or rants
  these days?


  **Angie:** Oh boy! There are many of those to choose from as well. Alright, I
  would say, my favourite pet peeve is probably not changed over many years.
  It’s kind of human behaviour related and maybe not as intuitive when I tell
  you this because I am from Minnesota and we get a little bit of a bad rap that
  we’re kind of passive-aggressive in here in Minnesota, but I am not one of the
  passive-aggressive Minnesotan. So, I am a very direct person, I don’t like a
  lot of beating around the bush or you know, game playing, or you know, kind of
  trying to figure out there read between the lines. I kind of like just having
  direct conversations and putting it out there and putting things on the table
  and you know, when people are not behaving that way, it does, it kinds of
  drives me crazy. I can’t, I hate trying to figure out what people are trying
  to tell me, it’s like just be direct.


  **Dave:** Yeah. I have to agree with you on that. For me personally,
  especially in the last five years or so, I’ve really tried to work on just
  being my more authentic self and being okay with that and I think in some ways
  it relates to what you’re saying although as my friends remind me, you can be
  authentic Dave but don’t be an authentic ass. So, I guess you can take it
  through forward.


  **Angie:** I think you’re exactly right. I mean, there’s always ways, there
  are always ways you can deliver a message and you can deliver that message you
  know, in an uncaring inconsiderate way or you can do so in a caring and
  considerate way and so, I think I would tend to always advise people to at
  least lean towards affability, right. People do want to be like, you can be
  direct and be well liked or respected at the same time. So, I think that’s a
  really good point.


  **Dave:** Yeah and I think you know, this applies to personal life as well and
  I’m a typical guy in my relationships. I tended to avoid the conflict or the
  difficult discussion with my wife or whatever and then wait and then
  eventually you blow up over it and I’d like to think in that area too. I’ve
  made some progress and what I’ve learned is, it’s just better to confront the
  issue. Again, you don’t have to do it in the heat of the moment but don’t let
  it fester either and I think that’s true both in our personal and our
  professional lives.


  **Angie:** Yeah.


  **Dave:** So, well that almost sounds like sage advice. So, let’s, let’s just
  kind of roll right into that. It’s our last question today. What is your most
  sage advice?


  **Angie:** Well, you know, it is a little bit a part of the sage advice. I do
  think, I think people, I think a lot of times in the business world, the
  smartest person in the room sometimes can have a style or an approach or a
  lack of likability and I’m, I’m a firm believer in affability is really a key
  to success. People like to work with people they like, they like to interact
  with people they like, they like to buy from people they like and so,
  affability is a key criteria for success, for anyone that kind of build off of
  that pet peeve comment. My sage advice was actually going to be a little bit
  different and that was really my advice would be related more towards business
  decision making, especially in a world where, you know, we sit here in
  healthcare with plenty of problems to solve. There’s a lot of opportunity and
  a lot of business issues and you know, unsexy processes that could be improved
  upon with technology and other services. You know, I think it is absolutely
  key. I’ve just seen this play out a million times in my career. Use data to
  make decisions of data-driven decisions and build products and solutions and
  services that are market-driven, meaning get lots of feedback across the
  industry from different constituents and take that input and help that shape
  your product design and use that input every step of the way and you’re going
  to come out with something much, much better on the back end than you ever
  will if you just take your idea and hunker down and design and build something
  and hope people like it. So, the data-driven decisions and market-driven
  products.


  **Dave:** Well, boy, that’s a ton of sage advice there. We better have you
  come back just to unpack that a little bit further. I have learned that lesson
  the hard way a few times myself and I have the opportunity to see a lot of new
  and interesting things and very often they’re kind of cool ideas, but you look
  at him and you go, there’s no market for this. Who’s going to actually pay for
  this as an example?


  **Angie:** Yeah, right.


  **Dave:** Or how will this actually work in the real world? So, I think your
  advice is really spot on. You know, it is my podcast, so I’m going to take the
  liberty here and throw a bonus question at you if I may.


  **Angie:** Sure.


  **Dave:** You are a successful woman in an interesting space. You’re in
  start-up, you’re in health care, you’re in IT. You’ve had to raise, I assume
  at some point some sort of a capital venture funding or otherwise and this is
  an area of interest of mine. It should be an interest of everyone, you know,
  which I guess in its simplest form is about promoting diversity but in
  understanding the challenges of making that happen and so, if you will forgive
  me for asking a question based on gender, I’m really interested in what your
  experience there has been and what’s your advice is to all of us, men and
  women about these issues and how best to navigate them?


  **Angie:** Yeah. Well, yeah, I, you know, I have been fortunate and lucky in
  my career and have had incredible opportunities all throughout my career. No,
  I, I would say that I’ve probably never really approached anything thinking at
  all about my gender. I think it was never, it’s never been really on my mind.
  It feels way more in the topic of conversation and on the mind of and I
  understand why it is and I, and I think that there’s lots we need to do and in
  the business world to help build up more leaders and more female leaders. At
  the same time, I feel like, if I were giving advice to women, I would say be
  yourself, take chances to speak up, don’t hold back and I think women have
  some, we do things different than men and sometimes that can be limiting. We
  might sit there in the room with some ideas and hold back from speaking out
  cause we, you know, we don’t want to say something stupid or say the wrong
  thing and so we might hold back to let those ideas formulate. You know, my
  advice would be take risks, take chances, speak up, participate, you know,
  have a, have a place at the table and I think things work out as a result. I
  do think and I have experienced in seeing this, but I will say, this is
  probably falls into my pet peeve category. I’m not a, I’m not really big on
  the whole victim thing. Hopefully, this doesn’t offend, doesn’t probably
  offend some people but I don’t believe, I believe we’re only victims of our
  own, like behaviour, especially when it comes to this kind of stuff. Look, if
  you don’t like something, you got somebody that’s being, you know,
  inappropriate at work or really biased against women. Go somewhere else.
  You’ve got smarts and skills and talents and abilities and go pack up and go
  somewhere else and take your skills but don’t be victimized by it. You know,
  like I said, take your skills somewhere else. I think sometimes because women
  have a little bit different style than men, that, that can be perceived as
  non-aggressive or non-assertive or maybe not as competitive and not as hungry,
  women aren’t maybe quite as chest pounding and Braggadocious as sometimes men
  can be in, that can look like, oh, maybe they’re not as confident. So I think,
  I think for men, you’ve got to also understand that women have different
  styles and, and you might spend a little more time drilling in and asking
  questions and you might find you’ve got some unbelievable female talent,
  leadership talent and you’re, in your ranks that step up and, and do things
  that you, you may be unconsciously didn’t think were possible. So, I agree
  we’ve got a ways to go in the business world, but I would just say from my own
  perspective, I’ve never, I know, I have never really approached anything
  thinking, well I’m a female leader and, I’m a, you know…


  **Dave:** Right, right.


  **Angie:** You should need more females in these roles. So, give me the job
  because of those, probably more of a thought of why would you not give me the
  job? Like…


  **Dave:** Right. Well, your advice about, you know, don’t play the victim and
  you know, if you’re in a situation where it’s just not working for you and you
  have options, exercise them, I think that applies to all of us.


  **Angie:** Yes.


  **Dave:** And, what I would add is that I am a huge believer in the power of
  diversity that none of us has a lock on truth. None of us has a perfect style
  and that it’s really out of the discussion and the debate and those different
  views that we get closer to what the truth is and so, I very much believe in
  actively cultivating this and not just gender but age and you know, life
  experience and all the rest and my experience has been that if you’re mindful
  of this, that it can just pay huge, huge dividends for everyone.


  **Angie:** I completely agree. I think it’s, I don’t know, maybe it’s all part
  of our natural aversion to change management when something’s different than
  what we expected, or things are changing. We may be kind of want to dig in our
  heels a little bit and go, oh, I kind of liked the way, the old way things
  were working. I had an experience where I was working in a sports technology
  industry for a period of time, not long a year and a half. The company was
  dominated by probably 20-year-olds that couple of years out of college. Their
  way of thinking and their ability to multitask and work on a ton of different
  things and adapt technology, it was so exciting for me to see and so
  enlightening because it’s just, it was just something I hadn’t experience in
  other, other settings and a, it was a breath of fresh air, but I think it
  easily could have been, you could squash it by all these, you know, young
  people that have their headphones on at all times or four different devices
  out, aren’t paying attention. No, they were actually getting a crapload of
  stuff done.


  **Dave:** I couldn’t agree more. I really find it disturbing people. Well,
  anytime you lump a group and say, those millennials.


  **Angie:** Yeah, exactly.


  **Dave:** Well, first of all, that’s not true, it’s a diverse group and
  second, you know, this is like our parents saying turn down that rock and
  roll, you know.


  **Angie:** Right.


  **Dave:** Every generation, we seem to do this, and we don’t seem to learn
  from the experience.


  **Angie:** We haven’t learned, exactly.


  **Dave:** No, I think you’re right. There’s some human nature here. Again, for
  me, I try to just be actively aware of that and recognize it when I had those
  feelings or thoughts and, and then kind of talk my way through it or think my
  way through it. So…


  **Angie:** Right.


  **Dave:** Well, thank you for indulging me on this bonus. I think you’ve
  shared a lot of tremendous wisdom here. I want to thank you for your time and
  for the work you’re doing with Central Logic and, and again for sharing some
  of your insights with us today. Let me give you the last word.


  **Angie:** Well, I just want to thank you, Dave for the opportunity to join
  you on this podcast and it was really a fun discussion and important topic for
  the industry. I think it’s a good thing that you’re doing and thanks for
  having me on.


  **Dave:** Angie, thanks for joining us today. We’ve been talking today with
  Angie Franks, President and CEO of Central Logic. You have been listening to 4
  x 4 Health, sponsored by Sansoro Health. Sansoro Health, integration at the
  speed of innovation. Check them out at
  [www.sansorohealth.com](https://www.sansorohealth.com). I hope you’ll join us
  next time for another 4 x 4 discussion with healthcare innovators. Until then,
  I’m your host Dr. Dave Levin, thanks for listening.
---
In this episode, we talk with Angie Franks, CEO and President of Central Logic, about the importance of real-time actionable information in healthcare. Angie has extensive experience with healthcare informatics and has held executive positions at Retrace health, The Advisory Board, Healthland, Lawson Software, and GeoAccess. In this discussion, we cover the importance of real-time data in patient transfers, the transition from quantity to quality based care, and the potential for clinical command centers in healthcare. Angie’s insight and bredth of experience make this episode of 4x4 Health engrossing and engaging from start to finish.

  