---
id: 3FVAT2S9dSoMmseEyaswoC
title: Announcing Our $6.5MM Series B. The Story is about Our Customers.
slug: announcing-our-6.5mm-series-b.-the-story-is-about-our-customers
pub_date: '2016-09-21'
categories_blog: company
author: 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
summary: >-
  Today Datica completed a Series B round of financing, raising $6.5MM and
  bringing our total amount raised to $12.5MM. We're thrilled to have new
  investor Lewis & Clark Ventures lead the round, and equally excited our
  existing investors—Arthur Ventures, Baird Capital, and Chicago
  Ventures—participated in the round and continue to view Catalyze as the
  organization they believed we would become when they initially invested almost
  3 years ago. 
lead: >-
  Today Datica completed a Series B round of financing, raising $6.5MM and
  bringing our total amount raised to $12.5MM. We're thrilled to have new
  investor Lewis & Clark Ventures lead the round, and equally excited our
  existing investors—Arthur Ventures, Baird Capital, and Chicago
  Ventures—participated in the round and continue to view Catalyze as the
  organization they believed we would become when they initially invested almost
  3 years ago. 
cta_ref: 64Hk6hz0aW2iik2IS8UqCK
---
It's been an exciting year for Datica!

We launched [Redpoint][2] in December 2015 to much fanfare. To date, Redpoint's product and services power millions of messages processed between healthcare partners per day. It is mission-critical infrastructure for over 300 sites, serving customers focused on changing healthcare through innovative new ideas.

We then re-launched our original Platform as a Service as [Stratum][3] in March 2016. Stratum expanded our ability to help large enterprise customers with unique requirements obtain HITRUST CSF Certified credentials in a cloud environment as they look to migrate existing technologies to the cloud as well as build new solutions to address paradigm shifts in the industry around care management and risk.

We attended several [events][4]. My co-founder Mohan Balachandran and I had opportunities to be present at the largest events like HIMSS to the smallest, private events like Health Evolution Partners Summit. Mark Olschesky, Casey Bryson, myself, and other team members presented keynotes or focused talks at several other events. My favorite was Mark getting a chance to talk FHIR at the HL7 FHIR Applications Roundtable in July.

Datica was given the honor of being involved with the inaugural Business Associate Council, created by the HITRUST Alliance. Here Datica has the ability to hear first-hand the impact HITRUST is having in the industry, while also playing a part in shaping its future. We're thrilled to participate.

Plus many more wonderful things, from [key executive][5] hires to building out more of our expert team to the positive feedback from customers.

We're excited to share this fund raise with all of you, our customers and the community. We're here to help you be successful at improving healthcare, whether by serving you with our products or providing open source policies to get you started. 

The story really is about our customers. We're so thankful they have put their trust in us, and we work every day to never let them down. This fund raise is about building momentum towards doing more of this exact thing—serving others. We can't wait to see what the next year has in store.

[1]: http://www.prweb.com/releases/2016/09/prweb13694385.htm
[2]: /managed-integration
[3]: /compliant-cloud
[4]: /events
[5]: /press-release/catalyze-selects-casey-bryson-as-chief-strategy-officer/
  