---
id: t7NRO6CeGGguWC62IY6sy
title: >-
  Catalyze Closes Series A Funding to Expand Development of Its Healthcare
  Platform
slug: >-
  catalyze-closes-series-a-funding-to-expand-development-of-its-healthcare-platform
pub_date: '2013-12-03'
tags:
  - hipaa
  - company
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: >-
  Catalyze Closes Series A Funding to Expand Development of Its Healthcare
  Platform
---
Madison, WI - December 03, 2013

Catalyze – developers of the innovative compliant cloud-based platform for healthcare – announced closing of its Series A round of funding. The funding will provide muscle to meet the overwhelming demand for its API-based compliant cloud services. Arthur Ventures, Baird Venture Partners and Chicago Ventures led the round of financing that allows Catalyze to scale its pilots with current enterprises and expand product features and services.

“Our goal is to simplify compliance and interoperability so developers and enterprises can focus on differentiation and adoption,” said co-founder and CEO Travis Good, M.D. “Industry trends in patient engagement mandates new tools and we want to make it easy for any developer to build those tools without becoming a HIPAA expert or data scientist.”

The funds will be used to accelerate platform development, scaling of existing pilots and new customer acquisition. Catalyze also announced it has completed an independent, 3rd party HIPAA-compliance audit evaluating technical security controls as well as organizational administrative safeguards and policies James Burgum from Arthur Ventures and Don Layden from Baird Capital will join the Catalyze Board of Directors.

“We’ve seen first-hand how real the problems are that Catalyze is addressing in terms of time, dollars and risk for developers and healthcare organizations. We are excited to partner with the Catalyze team as they work to extend the development efficiencies enjoyed by the business technology market into healthcare,” said James Burgum, Managing Partner at Arthur Ventures.

“HIPAA security requirements create a hurdle for developers in bringing critical healthcare-focused applications to market in a timely and cost effective manner,” explained Jason Duboe of Chicago Ventures. “Catalyze.io is well positioned to reduce friction for developers and healthcare organizations creating and deploying applications.”

### About Catalyze.io

Catalyze offers compliant, cloud-based software for the healthcare industry and simplifies health app development. Catalyze hosted infrastructure breaks down barriers to consumer engagement and helps enterprises manage relationships with consumers. For more information, please visit [https://catalyze.io](https://catalyze.io).

  