---
id: 5Hhb1uQys0Gms0cYM28o0U
title: Catalyze and HOSTING Partner to Support Rapidly Expanding Healthcare IT Market
slug: catalyze-and-hosting-partner-to-support-rapidly-expanding-healthcare-it-market
pub_date: '2016-04-13'
tags:
  - company
  - hitrust
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: Catalyze and HOSTING Partner to Support Rapidly Expanding Healthcare IT Market
---
### Two industry leaders conflate cloud offerings to provide clients with broader service delivery options.

Catalyze, healthcare’s leading HITRUST CSF Certified Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) and integration firm, today announced a partnership with HOSTING, the leading provider of managed cloud services. This partnership will offer 24x7 managed hosting services to the growing and maturing clients of Catalyze. Official details about the partnership will be announced at the HOSTING Customer Summit in Denver, April 13-15.

“We are proud to partner with HOSTING and leverage its Unified Cloud approach. Both firms specialize in delivering an amazing user experience, regardless of which clouds a customer chooses to run its application on,” said Catalyze Chief Strategy Officer Casey Bryson. “The relationship gives us the ability to work with a single support partner across multiple cloud service providers.”

“Catalyze is a leading innovator in healthcare IT, a cornerstone industry for the compliance capabilities at HOSTING,” said Andrew Schroepfer, chief strategy officer at HOSTING. “We are excited to bring our best-in-class support to the great customers and prospects at Catalyze in the short-term and to expand the innovations on securing Docker/containers running on the best cloud platforms in the years to come.”

Catalyze and HOSTING share a similar customer demographic in the healthcare IT landscape. Consequently, this trusted partnership allows each company to focus on its core competency, leveraging the other for its specific expertise.

“Trusted partnerships allow each company to focus on what they do best, creating an additional outlet for both of us,” explained Bryson. “At Catalyze, for example, integrating vendor applications with a health systems’ EHRs is an area of expertise and HOSTING has been a great reference for us when their existing clients are looking for an integration partner to solve sales roadblocks, increase staff bandwidth, or seek a fixed cost solution from one project to the next.”

Catalyze has played an ongoing role in the 2016 coast-to-coast HOSTING event series named MILESTONE. In February, Catalyze CEO and co-founder Travis Good, MD presented a keynote address, Excitement in Healthcare Regulation, for the kick off event in Las Vegas. Today, Bryson will present on how Redpoint™, Catalyze’s end-to-end integration solution, aligns with the event theme “Center of the (Cloud) Universe.”

Following the HOSTING Annual Customer Summit event in Denver, two more MILESTONE events are scheduled for the remainder of the series:

* July 27-29 - HOSTINGpartnerSUMMIT.com - 2nd Annual HOSTING Partner Event
* September - HOSTING Pre-Holiday PCI - Compliance Party in Boston and NYC

#### About Catalyze, Inc.

Catalyze provides an innovative HIPAA compliant, HITRUST Certified platform with a complete set of modules to handle, store and transmit PHI securely in the cloud. Scalable, HIPAA compliant and interoperable infrastructure is powering the future of healthcare, so Catalyze has built the platform upon which an enterprise can hasten healthcare innovation without the need to become an overnight expert in compliance. For more information, please visit http://www.catalyze.io.

#### About HOSTING

HOSTING delivers secure and compliant managed services on the industry’s leading cloud platforms to empower enterprises to increase revenue, reduce costs and manage risk. Headquartered in Denver, Colorado, HOSTING owns and operates six data centers under an ITIL-based control environment validated for compliance against HIPAA, PCI DSS and SOC (formerly SAS 70) frameworks. For more information, please visit http://www.HOSTING.com.

  