---
id: 285RL2MH9G8AqWOgWeaisK
title: >-
  Catalyze CEO Travis Good, MD to Speak on HIPAA Thought Leadership Panel at
  South by Southwest (SXSW)®
slug: >-
  catalyze-ceo-travis-good-md-to-speak-on-hipaa-thought-leadership-panel-at-south-by-southwest-sxsw
pub_date: '2015-03-03'
tags:
  - hipaa
  - leadership
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: >-
  Catalyze CEO Travis Good, MD to Speak on HIPAA Thought Leadership Panel at
  South by Southwest (SXSW)®
---
Madison, WI - March 03, 2015

Catalyze, Inc., an innovative health care IT firm that supplies HIPAA-compliant infrastructure services, today announced its participation in an upcoming SXSW Interactive thought leadership panel, which is part of the SX Health and MedTech Expo. Catalyze CEO and co-founder Travis Good, MD will join a cross-section of industry experts to discuss "[HIPAA: What it is and why you should care](http://schedule.sxsw.com/2015/events/event_IAP997059)” -- a panel session to help entrepreneurs understand HIPAA compliance and its impact on new health care tech ventures.

The thought leadership session will begin at 3:15 p.m. on Tuesday, March 17 on the MedTech Stage at the J.W. Marriott on 2nd Street in Austin.

According to a [mid-year 2014 Rock Health report](http://rockhealth.com/2014/06/2014-midyear-digital-health-funding-update/), digital health funding obliterated records with a 168% year-over-year growth. As a result, more innovative entrepreneurs are entering the space in 2015 and hope to put their stake in health care technology. The leadership from those health care startups will want to attend this SXSW panel to hear discussions around HIPAA compliance. Panelists, in addition to Dr. Travis Good include:

* George Gooch, associate director of policy & planning, Texas Health Services Authority
* Nora Belcher, executive director, Texas e-Health Alliance

Panelists are well positioned to address HIPAA concerns, applications, and the gray areas inherent in HIPAA compliance. “Helping startups and enterprise health care understand [HIPAA compliance](https://catalyze.io/compliance) is a personal passion of mine, and the very reason Catalyze has grown to be the trusted technology expert for engineers, entrepreneurs and administrators,” explained Catalyze CEO & co-founder Travis Good, MD.

### About Catalyze, Inc.

Catalyze provides HIPAA-compliant infrastructure services with a complete set of tools for handling, storing and transmitting PHI in the cloud. The future of health care will be powered by a scalable, HIPAA-compliant, interoperable infrastructure. Catalyze is building the groundwork so health care innovation can move faster. For more information, please visit [https://catalyze.io](https://catalyze.io).

  