---
id: wudzNxyW52iio68MwK2QU
title: >-
  Catalyze Delivers HITRUST CSF Certified Compliant Cloud Solutions for Amazon
  Web Services Workloads
slug: catalyze-hitrust-csf-certified-compliant-cloud-solutions-for-aws
pub_date: '2016-07-19'
tags:
  - services
  - compliant-platform-as-a-service
  - compliant-managed-integrations
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: 6kYqOBsQfeymIg08euYOqw
summary: >-
  Healthcare customers gain compliance and security measurement with extension
  of HITRUST CSF Certification Workloads on AWS.
quote: 3yxpYEcFHGE0Gi8IOA8wUK
---
MADISON, WIS. (PRWEB) JULY 19, 2016

[Catalyze][1], a trusted and mature platform for healthcare IT development teams, announced that the company’s compliant cloud platform is now HITRUST CSF Certified for its customers hosting workloads on [Amazon Web Services][2] (AWS). Catalyze passed its Common Security Framework (CSF) assessment from the Health Information Trust Alliance (HITRUST) — the industry’s benchmark for measuring compliance and security.

Catalyze, utilizing AWS services and solutions, provides a fully managed Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliant and HITRUST CSF Certified platform for the healthcare industry that offers development teams fast, flexible, and secure access to the cloud.

"Healthcare is an industry in the midst of transitioning to the cloud, and AWS is strategically positioned to service the healthcare industry's computing needs. AWS’s work with Catalyze, a company that focuses on meeting healthcare’s unique compliance needs through security frameworks like HITRUST, helps position AWS to play a key role in the health industry’s transformation,” said Josh Hofmann, Global Lead, Partner Ecosystem, Amazon Web Services, Inc.

Durham-based [iScribes][3], a Catalyze customer, recognizes the need for such collaboration in securing patient data. “We now process about 36,000 medical charts a month,” said Christopher Kwiatkowski, iScribes Chief Technology Officer. “Without the fast and flexible cloud access from AWS, coupled with Catalyze’s HITRUST CSF Certified compliant layer, our work would be curtailed, significantly more costly, and the patient data we synthesize daily would be at risk.”

[Healthcare compliance][4] presents a challenge for development teams. Minneapolis-based Zipnosis has experienced those challenges as it has scaled its virtual care technology. “Healthcare IT developers leverage the collaboration of AWS and its AWS Partner Network (APN) partners like Catalyze, so the unique compliance needs of the industry are addressed and supported,” said Derek Rockwell, Zipnosis’ Director of Engineering. “We have been using AWS for five years, been working with Catalyze for three years, and the relationship has allowed us to further consolidate, secure, and optimize our infrastructure — giving us a significant edge.”

Affirmation of Catalyze’s second HITRUST CSF Certification assessment of its platform, with an extension to AWS workloads provides customers with the following benefits: 

* Easier management of federal, state, and third-party security regulations
* A simplified method to showcase a company as a trustworthy resource
* Additional assurance that a company meets and exceeds the minimum requirements of Health Insurance  Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)

The HITRUST Common Security Framework provides an efficient and prescriptive guideline for managing the security requirements found within HIPAA and one for which Catalyze customers have found great value. “The time, effort and expertise required for compliance is often more than our customers want to tackle themselves,” explained Catalyze President Mohan Balachandran. “A majority of our customers already use AWS as their cloud infrastructure of choice, so the extension of our HITRUST CSF Certification to include AWS workloads is beneficial for them."


[1]: https://catalyze.io
[2]: https://aws.amazon.com/s/dm/optimization/server-side-test/sem-generic/free-b/?sc_channel=PS&sc_campaign=acquisition_US&sc_publisher=google&sc_medium=cloud_computing_hv_b&sc_content=aws_core_e&sc_detail=amazon%20web%20services&sc_category=cloud_computing&sc_segment=98921920362&sc_matchtype=e&sc_country=US&s_kwcid=AL!4422!3!98921920362!e!!g!!amazon%20web%20services&ef_id=VzSZWwAAAI2yHkPj:20160614203947:s
[3]: http://iscribes.co/
[4]: https://catalyze.io/compliance
  