---
id: 42zuVoCGcUK6qyeoQKkQKI
title: Catalyze Introduces Redpoint to Manage the Entire Process of EHR Integrations
slug: catalyze-introduces-redpoint-to-manage-the-entire-process-of-ehr-integrations
pub_date: '2015-12-02'
tags:
  - company
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: Catalyze Introduces Redpoint to Manage the Entire Process of EHR Integrations
---
### Redpoint promises to enable healthcare integration workflows and automate secure connectivity

(Madison, WI - December 2, 2015)  Catalyze, Inc., healthcare’s leading HITRUST CSF Certified cloud provider, announced today the immediate availability of Redpoint, its new product to manage the entire process of a typical healthcare integration. In addition to a completely new user experience, Redpoint includes three novel components:

* Scripts — pre-configured sets of EHR integrations packaged to enable specific workflows for digital health companies;
* Connectors — tools to automate secure connectivity to and from EHRs; and
* Bearings — workflows which coordinate delicate project management requirements throughout an integration.

Redpoint is the product evolution of Catalyze's industry-leading integration services, used by many progressive digital health vendors. Redpoint supports all major EHRs. “We spent the last several years aligning our integration product with the mission and success of digital health vendors who are disrupting healthcare,” said Catalyze Co-founder and CEO Travis Good, MD. “Tailor-made to catalyze the shift from volume- to value-based care, Redpoint enables an intelligent integration workflow, which accelerates the adoptions and utilization of digital health.”

#### Integration is a Journey, not an API or Interface Engine

Redpoint and its components will guide vendors through the entire process of a healthcare integration. The custom-built workflows, called Scripts, are for digital health use cases and some of these Scripts require multiple, bi-directional EHR interfaces. With Redpoint, customers simply get the APIs they require without needing to become experts in EHR interfaces. Redpoint addresses another major challenge to securing connections, typically via VPN, to health systems. This challenge grows exponentially at scale. Connectors automate the creation and management of secure connections, eliminating that burden for digital health vendors. Bearings round out the complimentary mix of components by managing specific project management requirements along the journey.

“Healthcare requires a fundamentally different menu of workflow options than it did when EHR integration standards were written 20+ years ago,” said Mohan Balachandran, co-founder and president of Catalyze. “Today, digital health vendors require a Sherpa, to guide them from one end of the healthcare integration process to the other. Redpoint now makes that possible.”

#### The Guide for Digital Health Innovators

Starting today innovative digital health companies now have a dedicated partner to guide them through the integration process as they scale. Redpoint promises to bring stability and scalability to present integration challenges. The new wave of healthcare innovators can now intelligently and securely integrate with existing health systems as quickly as they establish new partnerships.

For more information on Redpoint or to contact a Catalyze integration expert, please go to  https://catalyze.io/redpoint.

  