---
id: 5qjcWctlFSoqcwa4ew0cGK
title: Catalyze CEO to Present at Stanford Medicine X Conference
slug: catalyze-ceo-to-present-at-stanford-medicine-x-conference
pub_date: '2015-09-08'
tags:
  - company
  - leadership
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: >-
  Travis Good, MD, to talk about acceleration of healthcare innovation with
  HIPAA compliant hosting and integration.
---
### Travis Good, MD, to talk about acceleration of healthcare innovation with HIPAA compliant hosting and integration.

MADISON, WISC. (PRWEB) SEPTEMBER 08, 2015

Travis Good, MD, MBA, MS, CEO and co-founder of [Catalyze™](https://catalyze.io), an innovative healthcare IT company that provides HIPAA compliant, HITRUST-certified hosting and integration for technology teams, is scheduled to speak at [Stanford Medicine X](http://medicinex.stanford.edu/2015-glance/) -- the leading patient-centered conference on emerging technology and medicine. Dr. Good’s Oral Ignite! talk “Compliant Cloud Computing: How it will accelerate healthcare innovation” will take place on Thursday, Sept. 26 at 10:15 a.m. in the Lower Lobby.

"Medicine X is unique among health care technology conferences with its focus on patient-centered innovation in health care and the exploration of technology to empower patients to be partners in their own care,” stated Stanford Medicine X Executive Director Larry Chu, MD, MS.

According to Stanford MedicineX, the organization received an all-time high number of applications to present at the 2015 conference, which will be held on the campus of Stanford University and run Sept. 23-27. Good will address delegates, including attendees from across the country and around the world. Additionally, the conference will include an online global viewership from more than 60 countries.

Over the past year Good has interviewed and hosted the nation’s top CIOs, innovation authors and healthcare entrepreneurs in the [Catalyze Innovation Series](https://catalyze.io/innovation). The series has uncovered the challenges of healthcare innovation and this talk will build upon those discoveries, including information on using cloud computing to accelerate healthcare innovation without the need for additional time and personnel in building a complicated compliance infrastructure.

“In the new Millennium medical education mirrors the daily challenges faced by healthcare enterprise. Together we are trying to find ways to create more patient engagement, become more patient-centered and do so in a secure and compliant environment that ensures protection of PHI,” explained Travis Good, MD, Catalyze, Inc. CEO and co-founder. “Stanford University’s Medicine X conference is a premier venue through which to present these discoveries and I’m honored to be chosen to speak to the finest medical students and educators who are helping to make a difference in these areas.”

To learn more about accelerating healthcare innovation, download the “Healthcare Innovation Series: 7 Big Ideas” report by clicking [here](https://catalyze.io/innovation/2015).

  