---
id: 5otLSVyxpKc62EUa2Qgqwo
title: 'Catalyze brings HIPAA Compliance, New Product Offering to Microsoft Azure'
slug: catalyze-brings-hipaa-compliance-new-product-offering-to-microsoft-azure
pub_date: '2016-02-26'
tags:
  - hipaa
  - company
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: 'Catalyze brings HIPAA Compliance, New Product Offering to Microsoft Azure'
---
### Microsoft Azure customers will now have access to the Catalyze HITRUST CSF Certified platform

MADISON, WI (PRWEB) FEBRUARY 26, 2016

Catalyze, Inc., a HITRUST CSF Certified cloud for healthcare, today announced plans to add support for Microsoft Azure to its growing cloud-based platform as a service. Existing Azure customers now have the option to utilize Catalyze’s specialized and respected approach to HIPAA compliance.

Catalyze automates much of the compliance burden put on technical teams. With a single Business Associate Agreement (BAA), healthcare customers of Azure can cover the infrastructure obligations of HIPAA, freeing them to focus on their core competencies.

“Microsoft Azure is one of the strongest cloud providers available, and will only grow in importance. We are excited to bring our trusted approach to HIPAA compliance and HITRUST certification to its customers,” said Mohan Balachandran, co-founder and president of Catalyze. “A collaboration between Microsoft Azure and Catalyze will be a mature option for even the most complex of enterprise healthcare organizations. In addition, we look forward to working with the entire Microsoft Azure ecosystem.”

Catalyze provides two HITRUST CSF Certified products.

* Stratum, a compliant hosting solution, alleviates difficult technology obligations, such as encryption in transit and at rest, vulnerability scanning and intrusion detection, and backup and disaster recovery.
* Redpoint, an integration solution, guides customers through the journey of a typical healthcare integration by automating secure connectivity like VPN setups, or utilizing intelligent workflows for different digital health use cases.

"Healthcare is undergoing massive technological transformation. Catalyze's approach to HIPAA compliance means Microsoft Azure customers can utilize trusted solutions to privacy and data security which meet the highest levels of healthcare standards," said Nicole Herskowitz, senior director of product marketing, Microsoft Azure, Microsoft Corp. "We're excited to offer a HITRUST Certified platform such as Catalyze in the Azure ecosystem."

Healthcare companies large or small, whether existing Azure customers or those interested in switching to Azure, can explore Catalyze as a compliance partner starting today. To learn more, visit http://www.catalyze.io.

  