---
id: 1c6nwFkPNqCYcwseGS2gsW
title: 'Catalyze CEO Travis Good, MD to Keynote at 2016 HOSTING MILESTONE'
slug: catalyze-ceo-travis-good-md-to-keynote-at-2016-hosting-milestone
pub_date: '2016-02-01'
tags:
  - leadership
  - company
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
cta_ref: wWsIbfCLjasGCy6cKeO86
summary: 'Catalyze CEO Travis Good, MD to Keynote at 2016 HOSTING MILESTONE'
---

### Dr. Good provides latest regulation updates and their impact on the massive market of healthcare.

MADISON, WI (PRWEB) FEBRUARY 01, 2016

Catalyze, healthcare’s leading HITRUST Certified cloud provider, announced today that CEO and Co-founder Travis Good, MD will present a keynote address at the 2016 HOSTING MILESTONE Summit Series on Thursday, Feb. 4, from 10:15 to 11:00 a.m. at the Bellagio Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas.

Dr. Good will deliver “Excitement in Healthcare Regulation” — an important and informative talk about compliance in the regulated market of healthcare. In this 45-minute session, Good will discuss the state of this massive market, the expansion and re-definition of “healthcare data," share what’s going right and where improvements are needed, as well as how consumers of healthcare and providers in this crucial sector can benefit.

“Dr. Good’s understanding of healthcare compliance developed from multiple angles, so he provides our audience with rare perspective and expertise,” explained HOSTING Chief Strategy Officer Andrew Shroepfer. “Healthcare is a cornerstone industry at HOSTING such that our partnership with Catalyze extends well beyond our 2016 events and into the fabric of our Unified Cloud strategy and ‘Center of the Universe’ theme for 2016 with leading enterprises in regulated industries.”

The event series named MILESTONE, created by HOSTING™, engages enterprise firms embracing a managed service partner for their access to Amazon AWS, Microsoft Azure, and other key cloud platforms. In addition to Catalyze, sponsors of the event series include ScienceLogic, NetApp, Kovarus, SolidFire, Avtex, and Exceda. The MILESTONE events in 2016 are for businesses interested in HOSTING making them compliant in the cloud. The events include:

Feb 3-5th - Vegas.HOSTING.com - Regulation in Unregulated Industries
April 13-15 - HOSTINGcustomerSUMMIT.com - 7th Annual HOSTING Customer Event
July 27-29 - HOSTINGpartnerSUMMIT.com - 2nd Annual HOSTING Partner Event
September - HOSTING Pre-Holiday PCI-Compliance Party in Boston and NYC

“I’m excited to be one of the first to speak at the MILESTONE series. HOSTING is bringing the ‘Unified Cloud’ discussion to the technology community in many industries. We applaud HOSTING for its targeted emphasis on a market with such national importance — healthcare, where our partnership begins,” said Travis Good, M.D., CEO and co-founder of Catalyze.

  