---
id: 6XLQ0bim2IUmmqsI4uEG0G
title: Datica Joins the Cloud Native Computing Foundation
slug: datica-joins-the-cloud-native-computing-foundation
pub_date: '2018-07-02'
tags:
  - kubernetes
  - open-source
author: 5kC0Y798vm6ag8sCq0O2CQ
summary: >-
  Datica announced today that they have joined the Cloud Native Computing
  Foundation (CNCF) as a silver member. Datica has always been a huge proponent
  of the open source community, with more than 500 stars on the company’s open
  source policies, and joining the CNCF demonstrates its commitment to
  contributing to the Kubernetes® ecosystem. 
---

Madison, WI, and Seattle, WA 

Datica™ announced today that they have joined the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) as a silver member. Datica has always been a huge proponent of the open source community, with more than 500 stars on the company’s open source policies, and joining the CNCF demonstrates its commitment to contributing to the Kubernetes® ecosystem. 

Datica recently [migrated it’s security and compliance platform to Kubernetes](https://datica.com/press-release/datica-launches-kubernetes-enabled-platform/), a CNCF project, to offer a complete cloud-native solution for regulated industries such as healthcare.  Datica enables organizations to manage the compliant state of their entire enterprises in one actionable view — across multiple clouds and within multiple industries.  In addition to being cross-cloud compatible and open source, the CNCF Kubernetes community and project have grown at a tremendous pace. In fact, the [CNCF announced Datica as one of it’s 19 newest members](https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/the-cloud-native-computing-foundation-reaches-236-members-including-54-end-users-300671019.html) this week, bringing the membership level to 236 companies. What really makes Kubernetes a viable option is not the core project itself, but the community of tools and add-ons that surround it.

“The intent of open source is to provide community-vetted projects for the benefit of others, who then freely build upon them to solve other complex and pressing problems,” explains Travis Good, MD, CEO and chief privacy officer. “Datica is a big believer of the value and spirit of open source and, with our open source policies, has already taken the concept beyond bits and bytes to words and legalese that can often bog down a digital health enterprise hoping to bring swift change to the marketplace.” Good continues, “We’re extending that commitment to the open source community by joining the CNCF to collaborate with other Kubernetes developers who are trying to build secure and compliant products.”

“We’re thrilled to have Datica as one of our newest silver members,” says Dan Kohn, executive director of the [CNCF](http://www.cncf.io/). “Other members of the cloud native ecosystem who are also developing products for highly-regulated industries such as healthcare will benefit from resources and contributions from Datica.”  

### About Datica

Datica helps highly regulated industries manage sensitive information in the cloud. The Datica Platform complies with HIPAA, HITRUST, GDPR, GxP and more by providing a secure, compliant Kubernetes managed service that integrates with additional cloud services. Datica’s customers include mid-to-late stage startups to Fortune 100 companies. For more information, visit [Datica.com](https://datica.com).

  