---
id: o6gZiRusG4uaewUYYsyu8
title: >-
  Datica Celebrates 5th Anniversary as a Compliance and Security Leader for the
  Cloud
slug: datica-celebrates-5th-anniversary-as-a-compliance-and-security-leader-for
pub_date: '2018-05-31'
tags:
  - kubernetes
  - cloud-computing
  - gxp
  - gdpr
  - aws
  - dhsf
author: 3riALtpuXYeIaIGuaq8M4w
cta_ref: 6KOQ7XhaJqCI00oYacessy
summary: >-
  Company recalls milestones, talks of international expansion, and looks to
  future innovations.
---
MADISON, WISC. AND SEATTLE (PRWEB) MAY 31, 2018

[Datica](https://datica.com "Datica")™ announced today that this month marks the company’s 5th anniversary since carving out a niche market in 2013 when it first addressed compliance and security in the cloud. Today, Datica’s Platform for healthcare continues its evolution in one of the most highly regulated industries in the U.S. and has become an enabler for cloud-based strategies.

Last year, the company launched its first international pod and will be adding more in 2018. Getting in front of the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) has been a driving force for Datica over the past year and a half. In 2017, the company began a GDPR audit process of its Platform, a move that soon makes the Platform compliant with the regulations of HIPAA, HITRUST, GDPR and GxP.

Other milestones Datica (originally founded under the name Catalyze) has had since its May 2013 launch include: 

* Raised $12.5 Million in funding since inception
First to make the [Kubernetes technology](https://datica.com/platform/ "Kubernetes technology") for deploying containerized workloads HITRUST CSF Certified
* Selected as a premier healthcare speaker at AWS re:Invent 2017, and featured in the main keynote at the 2018 Microsoft Build conference
* Pioneered the [Digital Health Success Framework](https://datica.com/dhsf/ "Digital Health Success Framework"), leading to industry-wide acclaim, including presenting at Health 2.0 and SXSW
* Embraced a virtual workforce in 2013, tapping top healthcare technology talent across the nation

“Since 2013, we’ve put an emphasis on supporting customers by controlling growth, and in the first half of 2018 we’ve continued that company focus by spending all available resources on engineering and servicing customers, “ said Travis Good, MD, CEO and chief privacy officer. “When I think back to the start of the company, it’s humbling to see how our customer base has expanded from early-stage startups, then to mature healthcare vendors, and finally to the Fortune 500 mix of enterprise customers. It’s the compliance and security aspects that bring these customers to Datica; it’s core to our mission, so we ensure the Platform remains first and foremost secure.”

As Datica celebrates the past five years, it’s also a time to look to the future. Though healthcare has, up until now, been a core focus of the company, Datica's newly introduced Cloud Compliance Management System will open a host of new opportunities for organizations to manage the compliant state of their entire enterprises in one actionable view — across multiple clouds and within multiple industries. "As we expand our partnerships with Microsoft Azure and AWS, and on to Google Cloud, Datica will explore offering end-to-end compliance beyond healthcare," said Good.
  