---
id: 6ujz4BpKiQEQYesEMAwyWc
title: >-
  Datica Welcomes Former HealthGrades Executive as New Chief Technology and
  Security Officer
slug: datica-welcomes-christopher-gerg-healthgrades-executive-as-new-cto-and-cso
pub_date: '2018-02-20'
tags:
  - company
  - compliance
  - security
author: 6NxyE8vlfOqMOkkGsCSusA
summary: >-
  Industry veteran Christopher Gerg joins Datica to evolve the security and
  compliance posture for the cloud. 
featured_person: rVZcG8ORWKg8o4EIuqQ8a
---
*Madison, WI - (February 20, 2018)* Datica™, creator of the HIPAA compliant and HITRUST CSF Certified Platform trusted by those who deploy cloud-native applications and integrate with EHRs, today welcomed [Christopher Gerg](/about/christopher-gerg) as its Chief Technology and Security Officer. Gerg will lead the engineering and security team to help Datica address the exploding adoption of the cloud by healthcare’s trillion dollar industry.

Cloud is an important paradigm for all industries today, and healthcare has yet to adopt it in numbers seen in other market segments. “The blockers for healthcare are compliance and security. Datica has the best platform to address those industry hurdles,” said Travis Good, MD, CEO of Datica. “We are honored to have Christopher Gerg guide Datica’s Platform toward relieving the many burdens for healthcare’s adoption of the cloud.”

As CTO and CSO, Gerg will leverage his most recent experience as an industry consultant and also his experience gained as Chief Information Security Officer and VP of Infrastructure & Engineering for HealthGrades. Gerg’s deep industry knowledge has been well documented, including his authorship of an important O’Reilly Media book,  “Managing Security with Snort & IDS Tools: Intrusion Detection with Open Source Tools.” Today, the book is still being used as a training tool for its primer on TCP/IP networking and attack methodology.

Even though firmly entrenched in his own consulting company, Gerg said he jumped at the chance to join the Datica team. Knowing that organizations often look for a magic plug-in product for their networks to address security concerns, Gerg understands that secure networks are based on the foundational piece first.  “Tools are just components used to meet foundational needs; if you don’t address the foundation, tools hold zero value,” said Gerg. With Datica’s platform and services, customers can deploy their technology in a reliable security environment, with the side benefit of compliance, as well as having a platform that meets the stringent requirements of the healthcare industry.

“Working with a talented team developing a technology that allows an organization to deliver on their core competency while meeting compliance and regulatory obligations is an exciting prospect,” said Gerg.

### About Datica
Datica is the platform for digital health success. We solve the problem of HIPAA compliance in the cloud, and enable secure data exchange between digital health and EHRs. Customers and partners across healthcare trust Datica to ensure the barriers for digital health are removed so innovation can happen faster. For more information please visit [Datica.com](https://datica.com).
  