---
id: 3VMdBSfsdGkOaKm42geUMm
title: >-
  Datica to Speak on Managing Risk on the Cloud at Pacific Northwest Enterprise
  Risk Forum 
slug: datica-to-speak-on-managing-risk-on-the-cloud-at-pacific-northwest
pub_date: '2018-11-01'
tags:
  - events
author: 5kC0Y798vm6ag8sCq0O2CQ
summary: >-
  Panel discussion to feature four prominent healthcare industry leaders who
  share ideas on managing risk on the cloud to accelerate innovation.
featured_person: 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
---

Seattle, WA - Datica, the leading industry cloud for digital health, today announced a panel event at the [Pacific Northwest Enterprise Risk Forum](http://www.enterpriseriskforum.org/) in Seattle, WA. The one-day summit, tailored to the needs of audit, finance, and risk professionals will be held November 8, 2018, at the Grand Hyatt. Travis Good, CEO of Datica, will join a panel titled “Managing Risk on the Cloud as a Way to Accelerate Organizational Innovation” from 2:45 pm to 3:45 pm in the Princess II Ballroom.

Attendees will hear from four distinguished panelists:

* __Michael Parisi__, VP, Assurance Strategy & Community Development, HITRUST
* __Hector Rodriguez__, Worldwide Health Chief Information Security Officer, Microsoft
* __Steve Suter__, President & CEO, Healthcare Management Administrators (HMA)
* __Travis Good__, Co-founder, CEO, and Chief Privacy Officer, Datica Health, Inc.

The cloud is a key accelerator to enterprise innovation and has propelled a future around Big Data, AI, and data-driven decisions. But healthcare has had a challenging time adopting it due to compliance and risk concerns. In this session, experts discuss the business imperatives of cloud adoption, how it can act as an accelerant to innovation and growth, and then dive into how to properly manage risk in a way to facilitate organizational innovation. 

The key insight: Develop a dynamic approach to moving to the cloud that fosters innovation and happens to be compliant!


> We are excited to be a part of the Enterprise Risk Forum and to bring this dynamic session to the summit. Since the company’s founding five years ago, we’ve witnessed first-hand the industry’s hopes and frustrations in adopting the cloud due to compliance and risk concerns,” said Travis Good, MD, Datica CEO. “This panel provides the opportunity to create a dynamic open forum discussion that will help aid the healthcare industry’s cloud migration.”  
 
## About Datica

Datica de-risks the cloud for digital health with software that manages all ongoing compliance and security burdens not covered by cloud service providers. Through its suite of products, customers deploy cloud-native applications and integrate with EHRs. Datica is HITRUST CSF Certified, and services all who handle PHI in the cloud, from startups to the Fortune 100. For more information, go to Datica.com.







  