---
id: PtVZw6ZZ8ygWa4QW8ueGY
title: >-
  Aaron Neinstein, MD: Emerging Healthcare Data Challenges from Patient Centric
  Technologies
slug: >-
  aaron-neinstein-md-emerging-healthcare-data-challenges-from-patient-centric-technologies
pub_date: '2017-08-30'
tags:
  - ehr
  - workflows
  - cloud-computing
  - startups
  - innovation
  - open-source
  - apps
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  Never has so much patient-generated data been available. Yet, without a way to
  organize, digest and make sense of it all, most of these kernels of insight
  are left untapped. Many digital health companies from coast to coast are
  working on technologies to remedy that situation. In today’s podcast, we talk
  to UCSF’s Dr. Aaron Neinstein who gives us a glimpse into some of those
  promising technologies. He also offers an inside look at the patient-generated
  data challenges for doctors and what the future may hold for combining this
  data with what physicians presently can gather in a clinical setting.
author: 1gpUmvd6yuOKUIUIY620i0
guest: iiAcyP3wwEOEms2sgKYCa
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no"
  src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/340229233&amp;color=1055ff&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=true&amp;show_comments=false&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false"></iframe>
key_takeaways: >-
  1. Explore ideas around whether EHR vendors or third-party vendors will come
  out ahead on interacting with patient-generated data

  2. Learn about UCSF’s efforts around patient-generated outcomes

  3. Explore how patient-generated data creates granularity and specificity that
  providers haven’t had before

  4. Learn the ways in which patient-generated data may be used by health
  providers in the future
---
**On openness to patient generated data:** “A big thing is more incentives from the payors, so over the last two years, we've seen the introduction of the Medicare chronic care management codes which create the payment opportunity for use of patient-generated health data. What those codes do is allow you to bill on on a monthly ongoing basis for taking care of a patient who has two or more chronic diseases. You could theoretically have a nurse or someone else on your staff managing the patient remotely and be billing for that time.” 

**On empowering consumers to push for change in healthcare:** “So absolutely, certainly in the diabetes space there has been over the past 5 to 6 years a huge groundswell of people pushing for change in the use of patient-generated health data and in consumer-driven technology.”

**On other disease communities using diabetes for a model for technology and tech services:** “One place in particular where we are seeing similarities to diabetes is with asthma. If you think about capturing the action and activity that a patient takes in the normal course of the day. That's what we are talking about here; these are chronic diseases, where coming in for an office visit three or four times a year allows a narrow snapshot of what's happening in somebody's life. The reason we care about patient-generated health data is in theory, because it gives us the opportunity to see what somebody is doing day-to-day, 24/7, 365 in the context of their life, and tweak their treatment regimen or change their behavior to improve the management of their chronic disease.”

**On how EHRs fit into the future of patient-generated data:**  “I think one of the things that people don't think about is how many different categories of patient-generated health data there actually are. If you break it down, you are talking about 7 or 8 categories of things that comprise what we now called PGHD.”

**On different initiatives that might help with sharing data:**  “I hate to say it because it's definitely the buzzword of the year, but I think one of the things that is floating out there that's a possible way to help this problem over the next 10 years is blockchain. I realize there's a lot of hype around it and we are still completely unsure of where this is going to end up, but in theory, blockchain allows a centralized ledger for data so that there's a single source of truth that could be controlled by the person, by the user, by the patient. So, I think there's a lot of theoretical potential.”
  