---
id: 3fhBYekE0U8oRvsEKdiooi
title: From Implementer to Innovator
slug: from-implementer-to-innovator/
pub_date: '2018-12-11'
tags:
  - workflows
  - ehr
  - innovation
  - engagement
  - podcast
category_brand: true
share_image: /assets/general/podcasts/podcast-4x4-share-30-shah.jpg
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  In this podcast, we talk with Dr. Maulin Shah, Chief Informatics Engineer for
  Providence St. Joseph Health (PSJH) about his journey from implementor of
  electronic health records (EHRs) to Health IT innovator. 
author: 1iL3zeL6PWrbLRgZE9x5Mf
guest: 4ItPK780ivaUdNrMOuyC5V
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe title='From Implementer to Innovator'
  src='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/ud4h4-a12e66?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  data-link='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/ud4h4-a12e66?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  height='122' width='100%' style='border: none;' scrolling='no'
  data-name='pb-iframe-player' ></iframe>
transcript: >-
  **Dr. Dave:** Welcome to 4x4 Health, sponsored by Sansoro Health. Sansoro
  Health, integration at the speed of innovation, check them out at
  www.Sansorohealth.com. I’m your host Dr. Dave Levin.


  **Dr. Dave:** Today I’m talking with Dr. Maulin Shah, Chief Informatics
  Engineer for Providence St. Joseph Health, and the second largest non-profit
  health system in America. At providence St. Joe he focuses on maximizing the
  value of their EHR through optimization and innovation. He previously served
  as medical director for the epic implementation project across 26 hospitals
  and 400 clinics. In my experience Maulin is always a pioneer, always ahead of
  the curve, I can attest that he’s a smart guy who can often see around the
  next two corners and know how to get things done. Welcome to 4x4 health
  Maulin.


  **Dr. Maulin:** Thank you, thanks for having me.


  **Dr. Dave:** You bet, let’s get started. I’m going to ask you a series of
  four questions; you have up to four minutes to answer each one, so let’s get
  into it. Question one; tell us about yourself and your organization.


  **Dr. Maulin:** Yes thanks, I think you flattered me with that bio, so I am as
  you said position infomaticist and my current role is with chief informatics
  engineer at providence St. Joseph. I went to work on all the fun stuff, so
  providence St. Joseph health as I just mentioned it’s one of the largest,
  not-for-profit health systems in the country, we have the largest single
  instance occurrence of epic out there so we got now more than forty hospitals
  and we’ve got a thousand clinics and that has given us some unique challenges
  and some unique opportunities and I’ve kind of found myself squarely in the
  middle of those.  

  When I initially started as the medical director of the rollout, we were busy
  trying to figure out how do you convince 20,000 physicians to do something
  different, so we built our system informatics program, our physician
  informatics program from the ground up and we matured that over the years,
  then kind of transitioned into taking on the optimization responsibilities for
  the tools. So figuring out what the right work was to do and then how to
  implement those changes into our tools to kind of get the best clinical
  outcomes, so really partnering with our clinical leaders and figuring out the
  key initiatives that we wanted to send down the pipeline through epic.  

  Most recently I’ve kind of transitioned again in the last couple years and now
  I’m focused more on innovation and kind of the bleeding edge of what we can do
  with our EHR, so more than just keeping the lights on and more than just
  potentially building alerts or clinical pathways, really starting to think
  outside the box of how we can leverage this technology both in terms of
  patient engagement as well as improving provider satisfaction, burnout and
  those kind of things. So really been looking at different ways to innovate
  kind of all still in and around the space of EHR, but also kind of outside of
  that to really leverage this huge data asset we have.


  **Dr. Dave:** That’s such an interesting pattern, I’ve seen a number of our
  colleagues begin their journey with implementation and optimization and then
  they seem to migrate into different kinds of roles. I recently talked with a
  colleague and we talked about folks that migrated to the bridge of the ship,
  they take more of a strategic kind of role, folks that migrate down into the
  engine room who continue to take a deeper and deeper tactical role. And then
  there’s this kind of funny in-between in a way that’s around innovation, what
  drew you to that, what why did you personally decide to move in that
  direction?


  **Dr. Maulin:** I think there’s a lot of reasons, I think at a personal level
  you’re always trying to challenge yourself with the next thing and even though
  we were doing just incredibly innovative things in our routine optimization
  program, our model of optimization had become routine which is great news for
  Providence and St. Joseph is that we had gotten optimization to some degree
  down to a science how we intake a problem, how we understand a problem, how we
  specify the solution, how we use all the different tools within epic to solve
  that particular problem. All of it became a standard process and we were able
  to get to the point of rinse lather repeat, and that was a great thing and
  really was our whole goal was to be able to expand that capability from beyond
  a small sort of group of cognizant thinking you had to do it and to really to
  allow anyone who could get trained up on how to do this kind of optimization
  process in the EHR.  

  So once we got it to that point my creativity, actually that doesn’t get
  packed as much right I mean you get some creativity, the actual project work
  but you’re not architecting anything, you’re just kind of doing the same thing
  with a different clinical problem which can be interesting for a while, but
  for me I’m a biomedical engineered background I’ve only been wanting to kind
  of invent new things, I’m a creator not a person who pushes things along once
  they’re already out. So that I think was the main thing for me was that I
  wanted to switch back to a mode of being able to innovate and be creative,
  kind of at a larger scale than just project my project.


  **Dr. Dave:** Well let’s be honest I think you and I share a couple of traits,
  we both get energized by new things, new opportunities as you said the
  creative aspect, and you said something else that I think is very interesting
  in another pattern it seems like we also divide along the lines of those who
  like to start things, kind of the messy beginning and those who like and excel
  at sort of stabilizing and maintaining and shepherding, they’re both I’m sure
  you’d agree really incredible and important roles but they’re also very
  different.


  **Dr. Maulin:** Yes absolutely and scaling something is a different skill set.
  Scaling something from a small group to being able to have anyone do it’s
  talking about starting to add process and starting to add steps and
  reliability and those kind of things, which are all super important and all
  just made my eyes glaze over. I like to build stuff, I like to start things
  out, get them to a point where they can scale, where we know that they can
  scale with just some more elbow grease. Like we know this is going to work we
  just need to execute now the point that I start to kind of just transition my
  role a little bit and that’s where that scene in these points.  

  So when we did our rollouts, and honestly after doing a dozen hospital that
  was rinse lather repeat and so that was about the time that I transitioned
  into optimization career, just started optimization and then we did that for
  three or four years and now that kind of pretty rote and so now I’m moving to
  this innovations base. Which also keeps me a little bit more focused on that
  creative and that front end of the problem, because really my role right now
  isn’t to take something to scale, it’s to really try out a lot of stuff and
  see what’s stick and then the ones that stick try to find the right team to be
  able to take it to scale if that make sense.


  **Dr. Dave:** So you just gave me a great opening for the next question,
  what’s the most important or interesting thing you’re working on right now?


  **Dr. Maulin**: We’re working on a lot of really interesting things right now,
  it’s like three kind of primary things that are really keeping me busy most of
  the time, I don’t know if you’re allowed to have three primary things but…


  **Dr. Dave:** I asked you for one and I fully expected that you would give me
  more than one, no idea so you go right ahead.


  **Dr. Maulin:** Yes, so in our digital innovation pillar at Providence we’ve
  been working on incubating several different ideas and companies and one of
  the companies that we recently spun out that was incubated inside of
  Providence is a company by the name of Xealth and we can provide a hyperlink
  to that for your listeners. But Xealth is a really fascinating group, these
  guys are serial entrepreneurs who have worked in other industries and been
  just incredibly successful and they wanted to come in and see what they could
  do in healthcare. So they came in and they worked at Providence for a couple
  years, really it became part of the culture here and started to understand
  where our opportunities lie for the future and sort of came up with some
  ideas.  

  And so the platform that they’ve created is one for bringing the patient
  engagement digitization workflow into the physician workflow, into the
  clinical workflow, so what do I mean by that? Well there are so many apps and
  services out there for patients right now, it’s the Wild Wild West, I mean
  whether it’s your Fitbit and your Apple health all the way through diabetes
  management, obesity management, hypertension management, smoking sensation
  there’s an app for that, for everything. The problem is nobody knows what’s
  good and what’s bad; nobody knows how to separate the wheat from chaff. And
  when you’re a major enterprise like Providence St. Joseph what are you going
  to put your weight behind, what do you want every one of your patients to get
  or what are the top two or three things like every diabetics should get this
  after this other thing.  

  So the Xealth has built a platform to allow enterprises to really curate a
  formulary of digital services that can be prescribed directly through epic to
  the patient’s, so that for example if a patient is overweight I may prescribe
  them Weight Watchers and I do that directly in my epic interface and they
  automatically get an email from weight watchers with a pre-registered account
  and all sorts of other things. So we’re connecting both the clinical workflows
  of the enterprise with the app vendors and connecting those as data to connect
  them to the patient and really get the best outcomes.  

  Meanwhile it’s a full round trip where if the patient subscribes to the
  service that I recommended the physician, I can now see how they’re doing
  right within my epic interface, I can see if they’re going through a meeting
  for example or see what their progress is. So it’s a really interesting
  company that’s now starting to deploy more and more widely that we piloted it
  at problems and I get to spend some time really thinking through what are the
  key use cases to that.


  **Dr. Dave:** I have the benefit of having expensive time working with you
  guys at Providence and with the innovations team and know the Xealth team and
  couldn’t agree more with your observations. I think I see a second podcast in
  our future where we could just talk about this life of innovation and some of
  those aspects of it as well, very cool stuff. I want to take you to question
  three and before I do that I want to remind you Maulin this is a family show,
  but what I’d like to hear now is what’s your pet peeve or your favorite rant
  these days?


  **Dr. Maulin:** It’s all about usability, for me the grand missed opportunity
  of the EHR was to make the EHR about health, even though it’s called the
  electronic health record it really isn’t about health, it’s not about the
  patients’ health and it’s really not about the providers or the clinician’s
  health. I think that our major vendors like Epic and Cerner and others are
  starting to understand the problem and starting to think about usability more,
  but for me day after day I’m watching physicians and clinicians nurses just be
  more and more burned out by how onerous Bede’s tools that they have to use
  are.  

  And figuring out a way to get them the right information at the right time, to
  cut out stuff they don’t need, to not be alerting them all the time, to make
  the right thing easy to do, to make the wrong thing hard to do and to really
  make them feel like they’re being supported by their record is really my goal
  in life. I mean that’s what I really see as be the epitome of success and
  being able to have these tools in service to patients and then in service
  their to the caregivers and the clinicians around them, as opposed to the
  other way around. But you know as much as we get I’d say some lip service or
  attention, a little bit of attention here and there from the major vendors
  about usability just as they’re saying that they’ll release something else
  that just makes your life even more complicated.


  **Dr. Dave:** Keep it PG now but go ahead.


  **Dr. Maulin:** So epic in particular has a usability program that they’ve
  just launched and that usability program you can teach customers how to build
  more usable solutions within their framework great idea, beautiful
  presentation, the only problem is that internally they don’t listen to their
  own, what their preaching. And so I can point out examples in every single app
  within epic where they’ve violated their own principles and this isn’t just
  legacy stuff that they haven’t fixed, this is new stuff coming out and saying
  well you just said we need to do it this way and you did it that way, you’re
  building solutions that you’re admitting you know are not usable because
  you’re violating your own principles.


  **Dr. Dave:** Do you think that’s true we don’t want to just click on them; I
  mean my absolution is it’s true across most if not all of the current
  generation of the EHR?


  **Dr. Maulin:** Absolutely, and to be honest what really kills me in this new
  space of sort of app vendors it’s not all that much better, like they are far
  more usable because they can be nimble, they’re solving smaller problems to be
  honest. Most of these app vendors are solving smaller problems but obviously
  usability in a clinical setting is not the same as usability on your phone
  when you’re reading something or usability in a bank.  

  It’s just a different thing and the sooner that we can get ahold of the fact
  that clinical workflows aren’t like everything else, don’t try to fit us into
  something else but actually sit down and think about the clinical workflow
  itself and then design a solution as opposed to saying hey I have this cool
  widget, let’s see if we can make it work in a clinical situation, you’re going
  to get to some actual stuff, which there’s some stuff out there but it’s few
  and far between.


  **Dr. Dave:** Yes very interesting and I think astute observation about the
  emerging apps, I personally have a lot of hope for where that’s going and I’m
  curious if you see what I see. I mean I listen to what you have to say about
  self and what they’re doing and I can imagine a similar kind of plug-and-play
  app model for providers, are we headed back to a kind of best-of-breed in the
  future?


  **Dr. Maulin:** I think that’s fascinating, I think that is super fascinating
  so \[Inaudible 00:14:25.00\] they came out with an article this week that I’m
  sure you’re aware of, sort of all the buzz right now about why doctors hit
  their computers as a New Yorker, actually fantastic read again we should
  provide a link for your listeners if they haven’t seen it. But there is just
  an amazing synthesis at the end about how what we need to be thinking about is
  essentially an app based world, where based on your cynical role, the
  institution you’re in and what you’re doing you might be able to download
  various different apps that color your experience both in the EHR and outside
  EHR.  

  And it’s actually a really interesting idea it’s one that we’ve been really
  tossing around here at Providence now for over a year also speaking about how
  do we empower our clinicians again. So really the top-down nature of the EHR
  has been great to tame the Wild Wild West with a tool called it was, he used a
  biological analogies where he said we use to have mutation all the time where
  everyone could use their own workloads, there was no selection pressure so
  there is no selection of the best ones and then we got all these EHRs and now
  we have all selection and no mutation, there’s no variability that allows for
  finding best practices.  

  And so what apps could do and what I’m really excited about is the opportunity
  for introducing variation in a way that allows for natural selection to pick
  the best breed and really getting to the whole picture and that’s what we’re
  talking about on Sundays, it was a great article.


  **Dr. Dave:** Well I’m all in on that I’m a big believer in market forces and
  competition or part of the answer to the sort of innovation constipation we
  have right now, and I’m all-in personally because I’ve spent the last four or
  five years working with a company that’s focused on integration and our
  operability because they believe that that’s an enabling technology that
  that’s a fundamental building block in the kind of app economy you’re
  describing.  

  And likewise to me this is sort of interesting parallel with personalized
  medicine, you know typically when we talk about personalized medicine we’re
  talking about people’s molecules or maybe for being really fancy where their
  personal tastes and preferences, I think this extends to IT as well in that
  where we need to end up is personalized health IT as well for patients and
  providers. And we’ll know it when we see it because the technology will have
  essentially receded into the background, so that instead of looking at the
  technology we’re just doing our work. We’re a long way from that but I see all
  kinds of evidence in nature in other industries that it can be done.


  **Dr. Maulin:** Frankly I get to see a lot of examples in our industry of
  small companies that have some great ideas that could you don’t know which
  ones going to be the one, you look at that now like you know that might be the
  one that might be a paradigm shifter, that really gets us to that world where
  you have engaged and empowered clinicians, you can customize their experience
  and yet not very care, I mean like I guess special Holy Grail.


  **Dr. Dave:** Yes I couldn’t agree more. It’s funny I was quoted in an article
  recently as saying something like, we don’t need another crappy hard to use
  first-generation EHR and apparently that was a controversial statement, I
  thought everybody already believed that. Now I wouldn’t really single out any
  particular EHR, I know you spend a lot of time on that particular one, my
  experience is this is endemic in the industry, it’s just human factors and
  user interface design, it’s just not in the DNA of these companies it’s not
  how they grew up.  

  The dilemma is a lot of the companies that have that don’t understand
  healthcare and I would argue that’s why companies like Xealth and the process
  you described at Providence St. Joe are intriguing maybe that’s how the
  mash-up will occur. But as I said I also know it’s not as simple as that, we
  could probably devote a whole show to that topic. Let’s wrap up and Maulin
  take us home by giving us your most sage advice.


  **Dr. Maulin:** Well I save it never forgetting your roots is an important
  thing no matter who you are and where you are, and in informatics and in my
  career it means not forgetting what it’s like to be a practicing physician on
  the line, taking care of a second crashing patient in the ICU, knowing what
  the stresses are really like and staying clinically relevant, I quit my
  practice about two years ago because I just couldn’t keep doing both.  

  But staying in the hospital, staying in the clinic, staying on the side of our
  clinicians so that we’re in their service, we’re the service of our patients,
  we’re in the service of our clinicians and not forgetting that and kind of
  getting lost in technology or getting lost in some grand scheme of patient
  quality improvement that doesn’t have any basis in reality is to curb it all.


  **Dr. Dave:** Well I think that’s beautiful, if I could build on that I would
  add remember what it’s like to be a patient or to have a love right as a
  patient as well. And like you I think it provides the mission and the work and
  it provides grounding as you make what are often very difficult decisions
  where there’s no clear right answer, and I have also found that for my IT
  colleagues it really helps to connect them to the meaning and importance of
  their work as well, so I think that’s wonderfully sage advice.  

  Maulin this has been a terrific conversation I really appreciate your candor
  and your insights, like I said you’re a guy that can often see around the next
  two corners and I think you gave us a bit of a view into what is around those
  corners, so thanks so much for being with us today.


  **Dr. Maulin:** Yes, thanks a lot for having me, any time maybe we’ll have
  that follow up show sometime.


  **Dr. Dave:** I think we should.


  **Dr. Dave:** You’ve been listening to 4x4 Health sponsored by Sansoro Health.
  Sansoro Health, Integration at the Speed of Innovation, check them out at
  www.SansoroHealth.com I hope you’ll join us next time for another 4x4
  discussion with healthcare innovators, until then I’m your hoist Dr. Dave
  Levin, thanks for listening.
---
In this podcast, we talk with Dr. Maulin Shah, Chief Informatics Engineer for Providence St. Joseph Health (PSJH) about his journey from implementor of electronic health records (EHRs) to Health IT innovator. Like many of his peers, Dr. Shah was deeply involved in the implementation and subsequent optimizations of EHRs over the last decade. His shares with us how a combination of clinical, operational and engineering expertise combined with his energetic approach lead him towards a more entrepreneurial and innovative focus in his work. Dr. Shah’s views of where health IT has been and where it is going provide valuable insights that can guide future strategic planning.

Given his depth of experience and his innate passion, you can bet his pet-peeve is a good one and his advice to “remember your roots” is sage indeed.
  