---
id: 1jHGlhzwMTqbwORn5j7PXA
title: API 101 – Lessons From Outside of Healthcare
slug: api-101-lessons-from-outside-of-healthcare
pub_date: '2019-05-14'
tags:
  - api
  - integration
  - cloud-computing
  - healthcare-cloud
category_brand: true
share_image: /assets/general/podcasts/podcast-4x4-share-12-pierson.jpg
summary: >-
  In this episode of 4x4 Health, we continue our exploration of APIs with Sam
  Pierson, the VP of Engineering at Sansoro Health. Sam comes from the IT world
  outside healthcare – see what he has to say about increasing adoption of APIs.
author: 1iL3zeL6PWrbLRgZE9x5Mf
guest: 71p54QaMah98gMyn4jpfTj
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe title='API 101 - Lessons From Outside Healthcare'
  src='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/c2sp6-ae6aea?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  data-link='https://www.podbean.com/media/player/c2sp6-ae6aea?from=yiiadmin&download=1&version=1'
  height='122' width='100%' style='border: none;' scrolling='no'
  data-name='pb-iframe-player' ></iframe>
transcript: >-
  **Dr. Dave Levin:** Application programming Interfaces or APIs have
  transformed the digital economy and they are now poised to do the same in
  Health IT, but what’s all this API stuff really about, how do they work, why
  are they better than traditional healthcare interfaces, what should you know
  before you dive in? In this special series of 4 x 4 Health, our guest take on
  these and other questions. They help us demystify APIs and show us how we can
  use them to transform healthcare. Today I’m talking with Sam Pierson, Vice
  President of Engineering for Sansoro Health. Sam spent his career building
  software and software organizations as well as developing technology and
  product strategies. Prior to joining Sansoro, Sam was the Head of Engineering
  at SPS Commerce, a high-growth SAS company that serves retailers and vendors
  in the e-commerce space and has one of the most successful retail cloud
  services platforms available. At SPS, Sam focused on their API product and
  platform. He’s also held technology leadership positions and led various
  product incubation functions that companies like, Veritas Technologies and
  Symantec Corporation. Sam is relatively new to healthcare and brings an
  important and fresh perspective based on his years of experience in other
  industries. Perspective that’s invaluable as we reinvent healthcare and Health
  IT. It’s why we hired him at Sansoro and it’s why I asked him to join us today
  to share his perspective on APIs in general, how they’ve transformed other
  industries and how they could do the same in healthcare. Welcome to 4 x 4
  Health, Sam.


  **Sam Pierson:** Hey, thanks for having me Dave.


  **Dave:** Before we get into the API discussion, let’s start with our usual
  opening question Sam. Take a minute and just tell us a little bit about
  yourself and about Sansoro.


  **Sam:** Yeah, as you mentioned, I am relatively new to Sansoro. I think this
  is the end of week three for me and as you said before, you know, I am new to
  healthcare as well. You know, I’ve spent my career in the software industry
  building software, building teams and so that’s really you know, what, that’s
  really how I ended up here at Sansoro. We have folks in the team that spend
  their time building out the integration layer into the various EMR systems and
  exposing the common data model and then we also have some folks that are most
  focused on continuing the build-out of the cloud-based solution. I’m based
  here in Minneapolis and I started as an engineer before moving into different
  leadership roles in the software companies.


  **Dave:** Sam, I’m always curious about people that come into healthcare,
  particularly when they’ve already had a successful career elsewhere. What drew
  you to healthcare at this point in your life?


  **Sam:** Yeah, well, I think there’s, healthcare is a really interesting
  space. I think it’s really big. Here in Minneapolis there’s lots of companies
  that are involved in it and so, you know, it’s been something that I’ve wanted
  to get into and being able to build products that help people get better care
  and you know, improve the outcomes. I think it’s something that you know, just
  on a personal level is something that I’ve wanted to be able to do.


  **Dave:** Well, that’s terrific and regular listeners of the podcast have
  heard some interesting answers to that question as well as discussions around
  how folks inside healthcare and folks outside healthcare really need to come
  together to sort out which one’s a big and challenging and important set of
  opportunities in our country right now. So, welcome to the fight, we’re glad
  to have you.


  **Sam:** Yeah, thanks.


  **Dave:** Let’s turn to APIs now and I am gonna ask you a series of four
  questions. We’ll take about four minutes to delve into each one. I like to
  start by asking each one of my guests in this series, in your own words, what
  is an API?


  **Sam:** Yeah, well, you know, APIs are things that have been around for a
  really long time, you know, basically as old as computing itself. So, it
  stands for Application Programming Interface but it’s really just a neatly
  packaged piece of functionality, more of a, you know, a standardized adapter
  that you can count on to do something and to do it well. You know, there’s a
  million different analogies for this stuff but I, you know, the one that I
  kind of looked to is you know, if you are building a house in the basement,
  you know, you’re gonna get a hook up to the gas line, you’re gonna get a hook
  up to water, you’re gonna get a hook up to electricity and so, you know, when
  you go and build a new house, you don’t have to, you know, figure out how to
  make electricity, you don’t have to put your own water system, right. You’ve
  got a standard hook up where, you know, that stuff just comes into your house
  and it’s just something that you can rely on to be, you know, this fundamental
  building block as you’re building something bigger.


  **Dave:** That’s a really interesting analogy and it’s a new one in this
  series. I’m gonna take the liberty of building on it a little bit. So, I love
  this idea of you know, let’s take electricity as an example that it’s a
  service that’s provided, it’s easy to hook up to and consume. It’s important
  to note, there’s some underlying standards there. So, it’s 60 Cycles, you
  know, 60 Hertz, and 110 or 220 and the plugs are designed and the sockets are
  designed to be compatible and so there are these interesting analogies I think
  in the physical world if you will to, so the world of software and design as
  well, so that’s really good. You know, at the end of the day what I usually
  say is APIs make it possible for applications to connect, exchange data and
  collaborate and they really are forming I think an important part of the
  infrastructure for the modern digital economy and for the emerging app
  ecosystem in healthcare as well.


  **Sam:** Yeah, yeah, absolutely.


  **Dave:** So Sam, as I mentioned at the top of the show, part of why we asked
  you on the podcast was to get a view on APIs from outside of healthcare. I
  mean, like you said, they’re not new, they’re just relatively new to
  healthcare. So, what I’d like you to do is take a few minutes and tell us
  about you know, on your, based on your experience, how APIs have been used in
  other industries and some examples of real transformation that was enabled by
  APIs.


  **Sam:** Sure. So, I think, you know, I think it’s useful to, I think it’s
  useful to look at the history of this, of the use of APIs and how software is
  evolving and I think that’s been the thing that has really opened up
  innovation in these avenues for doing new things, right. So, you know,
  originally, you know, an API might be something that’s provided by an
  operating system, right or a programming framework and as software companies,
  you know, build bigger and bigger packages of software, there’s a, there’s
  been a pattern that’s emerged where those things get broken up into little
  services and so as those services are used across the rest of the product, the
  API is a really good, is a really good tool to use because it just completely
  abstracts and hides all the details underneath that API if the side and now as
  those APIs have proliferated, I think you see more and more companies that are
  actually offering APIs as a product, as opposed to something that’s just
  internal and I think the big idea there is that you don’t have to do
  everything yourself now. So, you know, I think that, you know, one, just one
  quick example is a you know, is around the consumer space. So, you know, all
  these different companies have websites and historically everyone has needed
  to track their own users and create their own user databases and once Facebook
  came around, you know, everybody was on the Facebook and so Facebook offered a
  set of APIs that would allow people outside of Facebook to let their users
  sign in with their Facebook credentials and so if you look at like this is
  just, it’s just a small example but I think it’s appropriate for APIs is that,
  you know, for the website that’s using Facebook’s APIs, you know, it reduces
  friction, it you know, increases user signups, it enables more tracking, it
  eliminates the need to manage any of those users yourself and then from
  Facebook’s perspective, right, it’s kind of a strategically compatible
  approach for them because now they become an even stronger network of, you
  know, of users and identity. So, that’s you know, that’s just one example
  where, you know, where APIs have started to, you know, basically replace whole
  buckets of functionality that software vendors would historically need to do.


  **Dave:** Sam, I think that was terrific and you’ve just compressed about 30
  years of programming history. It’s about a two minute summary and it’s been
  really interesting to me to talk to people like you and like John Orosco,
  Chief Technology Officer at Sansoro and others about the sort of underlying
  change in software architecture and how this gradually evolved into something
  that’s external facing as well. So, let me recount this the way I understand
  this and you know, I did some programing back in the stone age and in those
  days we built modules if we were really sophisticated but, and those modules
  did certain things but the modules were very tightly linked to each other and
  to connect one to the other, you really had to understand a lot about what
  module B was doing so that module A could connect to it and vice-versa. So,
  they were separate but very tightly intertwined and linked. You’ve had to
  understand the data structures, you often had to understand some of the
  business logic and the rest and the first transformation then was really in
  the internal architecture when we went from this modular design to a services
  design and essentially, we took those modules and we made them much more
  self-contained. As you said, we hid the complexity and the business rules and
  the others and increasingly it was more about how one module can provide
  services to another and it allows you to connect them in a much easier way and
  much less dependency and that was the services oriented architecture approach
  and then eventually it was realized, hey, you know what, you can expose these
  same services to the outside world to other applications and then the sort of
  idea of API was really and particularly public API was off and running and
  that’s how today Facebook and Google and others collaborate and share data,
  it’s how Amazon can tell that UPS has the package and where it is and all the
  like and for those who are interested in a deeper dive on this, we’ve put a
  series of blog posts up that kind of walk people through this and illustrate
  it. So, this and, this is the point where you get to correct me publicly if
  I’ve said things that aren’t exactly spot-on or…


  **Sam:** No.


  **Dave:** Please correct or elaborate…


  **Sam:** No. I think, you know, I think all of that is right, you know, and I
  think one of the other things that’s driven this is you know, \[Unclear\] now,
  you know, it’s not just all software running in a data center, you know, these
  big monoliths, right. You’ve got, you know, this predominant model now of you
  know, being sent me being a SAS company, having a, you know, of this
  cloud-based offering and when things are running in the cloud and they’re
  publicly accessible, that you know, that has really opened up the door for you
  know, this reduced friction for consuming other people’s APIs and I think the,
  you know, the biggest you know, one of the biggest things that is driving that
  is you know, you have, you know, if you’re gonna start a software company and
  you have to, you’re gonna build, you know, build a new system, you, you know,
  you want to be focused on what you’re good at. You know, should you have your
  engineering teams and building out tools for logging or for observability, you
  know, these are areas where you can rely on the APIs and the infrastructure
  that are provided by you know, these other, you know, these other companies
  and they have opted now, you know, instead of making a product that is, that
  has an user interface per say, right. They are leading with an API first
  approach and because that’s the, that is the most expedient way to market,
  it’s the most expedient way to provide value to your customers.


  **Dave:** So, there were two I think really important things in there and I
  want to go a little deeper on that. So, one is this idea of, you know, as
  people think about their business, they make decisions about, what am I gonna
  own and do internally and what do I essentially wanna outsource if you will
  and APIs bring an incredible flexibility there in terms of the technical
  planning. I can either build it myself or I can look for someone that does it
  today and offers that service through an API. I think most people can follow
  that but there’s something else you said that I think some important subtlety
  that personally I have just really started to grasp in the last year which is
  the connection between API technology and mobile computing, cloud-based
  computing and I certainly can’t get at all the subtleties but what I’ve been
  learning or at least I think I’ve been learning from folks like you and others
  is, you can’t do it without API technology, you can’t deliver the modern
  experience of you know, computing delivered in your device, in your hands and
  it’s mobile and it’s everywhere. If I’m correct in that statement, can you
  elaborate a little bit about that and why it’s so important?


  **Sam:** Yeah, no, I think you’re absolutely correct. You know, there’s been a
  lot of different models for, you know, for building and delivering software. I
  think the APIs as a, you know, again, as that standardized interface allow,
  you know, allow consumers and consumers of those APIs to, it just, it unlocks
  a whole bunch of different innovation that wouldn’t be there without those
  building blocks. You know, and I think it’s almost, you know, this proof by
  just all of the different combinations that are out there, right. So if you’ve
  got, I’ll give you an example, so Amazon offers a set of APIs that are, that
  enable anyone really to have machine learning capabilities or to do these
  really advanced things like image recognition, right. So, you could build a
  business around, you know, taking pictures of a receipt and then analyzing the
  text in that and importing that into a, you know, importing that into an
  expense product, right and so the company that’s gonna go do that doesn’t have
  to build their own machine learning models, right. They can go directly to
  Amazon and just use this thing that has been provided by them and by the way,
  which is getting, you know, better and better and better every day.


  **Dave:** Right and in fact that company probably could never build that text
  extraction tool better than the one Amazon can deliver.


  **Sam:** Right.


  **Dave:** One more at the price point that Amazon can deliver at.


  **Sam:** For sure, for sure and I think there’s others that are, you know,
  potentially even more important, right. So, you think about security, things
  around authentication and authorization, you know, if you’re a, you know, if
  you’re a bank or if you’re a hospital, you’re gonna want to make sure that
  those things are rock-solid and, you know, I think way, you know, early on a
  lot of people would, you know, they look at well, how do I, maybe I need to
  build my own, I’m gonna create my own cryptography to protect things inside of
  my products. Well, you know, the best way to do that today is to go, look at
  the standard, cryptography libraries and use those, you know, that’s gonna be
  the best, you know, that’s gonna be the best. Not only is it gonna be the best
  security solution but you’re not gonna spend your own time doing something
  that isn’t gonna make a, isn’t necessarily gonna make a big difference for,
  you know, for your own business.


  **Dave:** Yeah. I’ll give you an example from healthcare. We have a chronic
  problem with patient identity. Is Mrs. Jones in this record, at this practice
  the same as Mrs. Jones in this record, in this other practice? And, there are
  now available some essentially services like you described that allow me over
  the internet through a consumable API to leverage that service to see if these
  two records are the same service and it’s very rapid, it’s far more robust
  than anything I can build myself. Presumably it’s highly cost effective as
  well. So, essentially what we’re are talking at is you can begin to take these
  sort of key challenges, problems, services whatever and encapsulate them in a
  way that they are become building blocks and you can stack them and use them
  in different ways and then lastly I just, I wanna beat this horse completely
  to death. It’s combining that with cloud computing is allows you to deliver
  this essentially anywhere, anytime on demand and it’s that combination that,
  that’s just been incredibly powerful and transforming a lot of other
  industries.


  **Sam:** Right.


  **Dave:** I’ve got that more or less, right. I mean, I’m sure there are many
  other factors too but…


  **Sam:** Yeah, no, that’s totally, that is, that’s totally right.


  **Dave:** If you’ve just joined us, you’re listening to 4 x 4 Health and we’re
  talking about APIs for healthcare and experience from outside of healthcare
  with Sam Pierson, Vice President of Engineering for Sansoro Health. Sam, we’ve
  talked a little bit about the benefits of using APIs and my guess is you can
  probably name a few more. I’m also interested in some of the challenges. So,
  what have you seen in terms of challenges from outside of healthcare and what
  kind of window has that given you into some of those, either similar or
  different challenges in healthcare.


  **Sam:** Yeah, yeah. Well, I think, you know, I think, you know, we talked a
  little bit about architecture and software design, you know, these patterns
  that they have emerged around micro-services. You know, I think it’s Epic,
  like building the system becomes more simple, it enables you to be intentional
  about your design. One of the things that does get challenging though is now
  you have this just, you’ve got a distributed system and you have these pockets
  of functionality that can potentially be, you know, littered all over the
  place and so, you know, having a strategy for being able to quickly refactor
  your software or you know, being able to change a pattern is, you know, is
  really important because there’s just an increased complexity now of you know,
  having these APIs get plugged into different parts of your software.


  **Dave:** It’s that old challenge of you can deconstruct things and there’s
  value at deconstructing them into smaller units but they’re also that creates
  more challenge when you try to construct them into a functional whole. Is
  that…, yeah.


  **Sam:** Yeah, yeah and just to, I mean, to build on the analogy that we were
  using before, right. So, we talked about electricity, right. Well, you know, I
  don’t, you know, my house, we, you know, we bought this house, you know, the
  electricity is, the electrical wiring is run through the house. If I want to
  make any changes or add line, you know, add additional outlets, right, like
  I’m gonna have to do some pretty significant work to either tap into the
  existing lines or to, you know, refactor the way that the electricity is run
  throughout the house. The same thing with, you know, with the ductwork, you
  know, if I’ve got a room, if I’ve got a room that gets cold in the winter, you
  know, it’s gonna be a pretty heavy lift for me to run another duct all the way
  from the basement where the furnace is up to, you know, the second floor when,
  you know, when everything is finished and I think that, that’s a, you know,
  it’s just another, another analogy for, you know, for software where, you
  know, if you’re not careful about how you build things, you know, you can end
  up in a situation where you have to, you expend a lot of resources just, you
  know, making things more flexible and not necessarily adding as much business
  value for your customers.


  **Dave:** It’s a good caution and of course, the flip side of that and I’ll
  just, I’ll continue, or analogy is that you’re essentially talking about
  re-engineering an existing building or doing some rehab. The plus side of
  course is, if you decide to do an addition then you already know well, these
  are the components that are available, this is the type of wiring, these are
  the sockets you should use. Here’s the switches and the outlets and all the
  rest and it’s, and at that point the design challenge really becomes more
  about well, where do I put these things, how do I could form to code and those
  others but all of those other issues have been worked out for you in advance.
  I wanna go a little deeper on this too because I’ve seen some interesting
  things in terms of forward and backward compatibility in the API world and at
  least it seems to me as an ancient and at this point inexperience programmer
  that there are some inherent advantages here in terms of being able to make
  passive changes, extending data models, extending services to enhance what
  you’re doing while still preserving backwards-compatibility so that people
  that use it today aren’t completely disrupted and of course, that’s something
  people strive for in general and in software design but, are there some
  particular advantages in the API world in terms of the keeping everybody whole
  while you continue to move forward and then, and advance the capability?


  **Sam:** Yeah, I think with APIs, it is a challenge, but I think it’s probably
  more so a challenge if you, you know, if you don’t have APIs, right. I mean,
  so, APIs are gonna allow you to decouple, you know, responsibility and, you
  know, in that business context between different services. I think there’s,
  you know, there’s two different things. One is, you know, at Sansoro, right,
  we take a lot of time to think through impacts to the existing data model,
  right and, you know, I think from a vendor perspective, you know, you are
  always trying to make the developer’s life easier, right and so that means as
  much as you can do without needing to issue breaking changes in the API, you
  know, it’s almost, you know, it’s your responsibility as a, you know, as a
  product developer to, you know, to make sure that you minimize those as much
  as you can and then, you know, that encapsulation layer does help you do that
  and I think, you know, in vice-versa when you are in the market looking for a
  product that solves a problem that you’ve got, understanding how that vendor
  chooses to version APIs and, you know, how robust their you know, their
  backwards compatibility is, is an important thing to consider.


  **Dave:** Yeah, and it’s very interesting to me to watch this in terms of the
  ability to say, I’m gonna add some things to enhance what I’m offering today
  but that’s gonna be transparent and invisible to someone who consumes the
  current API. It’s an addition to, it’s not a disruption of and so, we’ll
  continue the electricity analogy I think until we’ve completely destroyed it,
  but the analogy here would be, I started out with a two-prong plug and then I
  added some sockets that are three prongs. They have a ground pin as well but
  those old two-prong plugs, they still can plug in there. They can’t take
  advantage of the grounding, but they still work. So, you know, kind of a
  simple physical analogy to the sort of evolution. Doesn’t happen automatically
  in the API world, you have to think and plan, but my impression is that some
  of the basic constructs of how API sort of designed and operate, make it
  easier and more possible to do that if you are intentional about it.


  **Sam:** Yeah, that’s right.


  **Dave:** Great! Any other challenges that you think folks should be aware of,
  particularly the people that are kind of new to this or diving in?


  **Sam:** Yeah. I mean, I think as you build out your own systems just, you
  know, having a strategy for identifying issues with, you know, whether it’s
  your own services or whether it’s with services you depend upon. You know,
  there’s tools that will monitor APIs for you, they will alert you and they’ll
  call you if those APIs are down or things are having a problem. I mean, I
  think those are just some of the things that you got to have in place,
  otherwise, you know, when things go poorly and they will go poorly, you’re
  gonna be, you know, you’re gonna be kind of grasping at straws.


  **Dave:** Well, the last question I usually ask my guests is to offer us some
  sage advice. I’m gonna give you the option of offering us just sage advice
  about life in general or if you have something specific about the world of
  APIs or both, it’s really your call.


  **Sam:** Okay, yeah. Well, I think I’ll stick to the APIs, but I think like,
  you know, like anything else, I think you got to have an explicit strategy,
  you know, and that strategy has to map to, you know, what you do well, what
  your company does well, you know, the strengths that you, you know, that you
  bring to the table and, you know, be, you know, be very clear about what do
  you want teams to be focused on and what do you want to completely outsource
  to somebody else and then making sure that those values are aligned at the
  company and at, you know, at the team level and, you know, that’s probably,
  you know, the biggest thing is, you know, coming at it from a, you know, from
  a tops down kind of strategy level. I think that, that you know, just
  approaching those decisions with a framework around, is this something that we
  wanna be in the business of, is a really powerful question and then it’ll, you
  know, that’ll subsequently open up the door for, you know, evaluating partners
  that, you know, I think that at the end of the day will help you go much
  faster as a business than you would on your own.


  **Dave:** Well Sam, I think that’s, that is actually sage advice about life
  and about work in general and as you’ve pointed out I think very clearly
  today, part of the beauty of API technology is it just gives you a lot more
  flexibility and granularity as you think about the thing that you wanna
  accomplish and, you know, what do you do yourself and where can you
  essentially find a partner that’s just got a better mousetrap and then
  leverage that through API services. So, to me this all comes together very,
  very nicely. The last thing I would ask you today is as you think about
  experiences from outside of healthcare, was there a moment when this all just
  crystalized for you? You know, when you looked at the landscape and said, this
  is the future, and this is where we’re going.


  **Sam:** It’s a, you know, it’s a really good question. I don’t think that
  there’s, I don’t think that there’s, there was ever a, you know, a moment
  where that really hit me but I think, you know, in, you know, in other
  companies we, you know, we would always talk about, you know, hey, there’s
  gotta be a way for us to scale teams, you know, and that was sort of the
  first, you know, that was one of the first ones where, you know, APIs became
  the way that teams would, you know, essentially co, you know, coexist and it
  helps the organization to scale, you know, and then that’s kind of at the
  organizational level and then from a product strategy level, you know, at SPS
  we realized that, you know, there’s a lot of value that we can bring to the
  market through, you know, this web-based products but at the same time, you
  know, we started to hear more and more from customers that wanted to, you
  know, they wanted to integrate our functionality into their own offerings and,
  you know, the most clear way for us to do that was through this API first
  strategy and then, you know, when I, you know, when I started talking with,
  you know, Jeremy and the folks at Sansoro, you know, it was just, it was very
  obvious that this is, you know, this is something that solves a major problem,
  you know, and ultimately will, you know, will help others, you know, innovates
  in the healthcare space.


  **Dave:** Well, I love the connection you drew to how you organize your teams
  as well because just like API allows you to sort of containerize if you will,
  to sort of say look, we’re gonna put these functions over here and this is
  what they’ll look like to the outside world. It allows you to organize your
  teams that way as well. They can focus on their segment of this if you will. I
  can tell you from my perspective, I’ve had two moments at least in the
  healthcare world where I was convinced that APIs were coming and they’re gonna
  change healthcare. One was several years ago when I saw some just early
  demonstration projects of using APIs as an alternative for integrating
  applications into an EHR and what those teams were able to do just blew me
  away and I was absolutely convinced at that moment, this is where we’re headed
  in healthcare, I don’t know how \[Unclear\] or how far but that’s where we’re
  going and when we started out at Sansoro five years ago quite frankly, we’d go
  to a lot of health systems and we get puzzled looks when we talked about APIs.
  Well, we’ve come a long way because as most people know in the past month or
  so, the Federal Government has dropped proposed rules that mandate, the
  adoption and use of APIs as part of the modern infrastructure for healthcare.
  So, we’ve gone in five years from, what are these APIs you speak of to, we’re
  all gonna adopt and use APIs and I think that’s a real powerful moment and I’m
  personally very excited about it because of the many things we’ve talked about
  today. It unlocks creativity, it’s more efficient, it allows us to
  collaborate, it allows us to evolve and innovate much more quickly. All things
  that we desperately need to do in healthcare. So, Sam, I’m grateful to you for
  you joining the fight but for it’s a good cause, it’s a, it has a lot of
  meaning and I’m also grateful for you sharing your wisdom with us here today.


  **Sam:** For sure. Thanks for having me Dave. You know, I couldn’t be more
  excited to join the team and get to work on this stuff.


  **Dave:** We’ve been talking APIs with Sam Pierson, Vice President of
  Engineering, Sansoro Health. Sam, thanks again for joining us today.


  **Sam:** Thanks Dave.


  **Dave:** You’ve been listening to 4 x 4 Health, sponsored by Sansoro Health.
  Sansoro Health, integration at the speed of innovation. Check them out at
  [www.sansorohealth.com](http://www.sansorohealth.com). I hope you’ll join us
  next time for another 4 x 4 discussion with healthcare innovators. Until then,
  I’m your host Dr. Dave Levin, thanks for listening.
---
In this episode of 4x4 Health, we continue our exploration of APIs with Sam Pierson, the VP of Engineering here at Sansoro Health and a recent addition to our team.  Sam has extensive experience working with APIs outside of healthcare and we were excited to explore his unique perspective in this episode.  Throughout the conversation, Sam touches on several important developments that have already revolutionized e-commerce, such as cloud computing, and explains how APIs can unlock these innovations for healthcare.  We often say that healthcare is a decade behind the rest of the internet economy and talking to Sam is a great reminder of Health IT’s incredible potential to decrease costs and improve outcomes for health systems of all sizes.
  