---
id: 3LD5X2LY3KYK4yamK2WWCC
title: Grahame Grieve - the future of healthcare interoperability (part 3)
slug: grahame-grieve-pt3
pub_date: '2016-06-20'
tags:
  - fhir
  - hitrust
  - compliant-managed-integrations
discovery_topic: discovery_topic/ehr-integrations
summary: >-
  In this episode, Grahame Grieve, Product Director of FHIR for HL7 continues
  his last interview in a three-part series with Datica. Mark Olschesky,
  Datica's Chief Data Officer questions Grieve about "The Economics of FHIR and
  Interoperability" for this last interview. The economics of FHIR is a
  passionate subject for Grieve for which he recognizes that no pat answers
  exist. In this interview, Grieve contextualizes the questions and provides
  possible answers that only time will prove out. 
author: 5dsPZqJr4Qu2uww6KgYO0G
guest: 5ucOd6EBGgs08WcMOIYyqm
podcast_embed: >-
  <iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no"
  src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/274588784&amp;color=1055ff&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false"></iframe>
key_takeaways: >-
  1. Learn how governance impacts standards and collaboration in healthcare

  2. Understand the complexity of integrations and the role of APIs

  3. Develop greater awareness for crowdsourcing related to FHIR and healthcare
  technology advancements

  4. Discover the realities of who should own healthcare data
---
**On the road building of healthcare infrastructure:** "It's very similar economics is to road building. It's the creation of infrastructure that enables exchange to happen. Everybody's interested in a cheaper way to get from A to B. But not everybody's interested in what is required to create a cheaper way to get from A to B."

**On how APIs impact the end user:** "[Clinicians] are trapped in systems that they don't feel bring value to them or their patients."

"People have **widely variable workflows.** There is no single description of the workflow that worked for everybody."

"With APIs it's pretty hard to explain to most end users why APIs makes a difference. But if you **focus on the outcome,** which is better integration, better system wide flows of data and more mobility to customize their experience, then that story becomes compelling for a user."

**On how FHIR and crowdsourcing address mappings:** "FHIR actually includes specific primary artifacts for dealing with crosswalks and mappings, and we're investing as a community, in building the tools around them. But for the first time, part of the main specification of what we do is the ability to publish, share, review those crosswalks and mappings and to make the executable part of the overall frameworks."

"We would like to set up a community that manages shared, public crosswalks between common coding systems. We have the infrastructure and the community is starting to think about doing that."

"I'm a very strong believer in crowdsourcing when it comes to something like crosswalks and mappings. And the ability to use the crowd to refine the fine detail."

**On the growth of free EHR solutions:** "There's certainly going to be a growth of free EHR solutions. Of course, free is a misnomer, somebody's going to pay someone for the implementation, perhaps with consulting fees."

**On data ownership:** "There are people who argue that the patient should really own the data, but it's not really the patient's data. It's not easy to tell [patient vs provider data] apart and that will continue to be a challenge for us. From a market perspective, the patient can only own the data if the patient pays to own the data. I do not see anyone considering that fact realistically."

**On security and privacy of patient data:** "[A black market for healthcare] exists because having healthcare data increases your ability to get access to financial accounts."
  